1. THE OPENING
This sura is seen to be a precise table of contents of the Qur ᾿anic message. It is
very important in Islamic worship, being an obligatory part of the dailyprayer, repeated several times during the day.
1In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy,a the Giverb of Mercy!c
2Praise belongs to God, Lordd of the Worlds,e3the Lord of Mercy,
the Giver of Mercy, 4Master of the Day of Judgement. 5It is You we
worship; it is You we ask for help. 6Guide us to the straight path:
7the path of those You have blessed, those who incur no angerf and
who have not gone astray.
aMost occurrences of this term rahman  in the Qur ᾿an are in the context of Him being
mighty and majestic as well as merciful. The addition of the word ‘Lord’ here isintended to convey this aspect of the term.
bThis term rahim  is an intensive form suggesting that the quality of giving mercy is
inherent in God’s nature.
cThis is the only instance where this formula, present at the start of every sura but
one, is counted as the ﬁrst numbered verse.
dThe Arabic root r–b–b  has connotations of caring and nurturing in addition to
lordship, and this should be borne in mind wherever the term occurs and is rendered‘lord’.
eAl- ῾alamin  in Arabic means all the worlds, of mankind, angels, animals, plants, this
world, the next, and so forth.
fNote that the verb here is not attributed to God.2. THE COW
This is a Medinan sura and the longest in the Qur ᾿an, containing material
revealed over several years, and named after the story of the cow which theIsraelites were ordered to slaughter (verses 67 ﬀ.). The sura opens with a
response to the plea for guidance in Sura 1, ‘The Opening’, dividing mankind
into three groups in their response to this guidance– –the believers, the dis-believers, and the hypocrites– –and closes con ﬁrming the tenets of faith given in
the opening verses ( 3–5). The addressee shifts as the sura progresses: at various
times the text addresses mankind in general (verses 21 ﬀ.), where they are urged
to serve God who has been so gracious to them (they are reminded that God
created Adam and favoured him over the angels), the Children of Israel(verses 40 ﬀ.), who are reminded of God’s special favours to them and urged to
believe in scriptures that do indeed con ﬁrm their own, and the believers (verses
136 ﬀ .), who are given instruction in many areas– –prayer, fasting, pilgrimage,
defence, marital law, and ﬁnancial matters.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Alif Lam Mima
2This is the Scripture in which there is no doubt,b containing guid-
ance for those who are mindfulc of God, 3who believe in the unseen,d
aThese are the names of the three Arabic letters a,l, and m. Twenty-nine suras of
the Qur ᾿an begin with separate alphabetical letters like these, from one individual letter
up to ﬁve. Various interpretations have been o ﬀered. It is su ﬃcient to mention two here:
(1) these letters indicated to the Arabs who ﬁrst heard the Qur ᾿an that the Qur ᾿an
consists of letters and words of their own language, although it was superior to anyspeech of their own, being of divine origin; ( 2) they are an exclamatory device intended
to arrest the listeners’ attention, similar to the custom of starting poems with anemphatic ‘No!’ or ‘Indeed!’ Exegetes normally added, after expounding their theories,‘God knows best.’
bThe Arabic construction la rayba ﬁhi carries more than one meaning, including
‘there is nothing dubious about/in it’ and ‘it is not to be doubted’ as regards its origin orcontents.
cThe root w–q–y  in this morphological form has the meaning of being mindful or
being wary of something. The opposite of being mindful of God is to ignore Him orhave no reference to Him in your thought, feeling, or action. This is a fundamentalconcept about God and the believers’ relation to Him. Many translators render the termas ‘those who fear God’, but this is an over-expression of the term and does notcorrectly convey the meaning of the concept, which is a very common one in the Qur ᾿an.
dWhat is beyond their perception, literally ‘absent’– – this applies to the nature of
God, the Hereafter, historical information not witnessed, etc.keep up the prayer,a and giveb out of what We have provided for
them; 4those who believe in the revelation sent down to you
[Muhammad], and in what was sent before you, those who haveﬁrm faith in the Hereafter. 5Such people are following their Lord’s
guidance and it is they who will prosper. 6As for those who dis-
believe, it makes no di ﬀerence whether you warn them or not: they
will not believe. 7God has sealed their hearts and their ears, and their
eyes are covered. They will have great torment.
c
8Some people say, ‘We believe in God and the Last Day,’ when
really they do not believe. 9They seek to deceive God and the
believers but they only deceive themselves, though they do not real-
ize it. 10There is a disease in their hearts, to which God has added
more: agonizing torment awaits them for their persistent lying.11When it is said to them, ‘Do not cause corruption in the land,’ they
say, ‘We are only putting things right,’ 12but really they are causing
corruption, though they do not realize it. 13When it is said to them,
‘Believe, as the others believe,’ they say, ‘Should we believe as thefools do?’ but they are the fools, though they do not know it. 14When
they meet the believers, they say, ‘We believe,’ but when they arealone with their evil ones, they say, ‘We’re really with you; we wereonly mocking.’ 15God is mocking them, and allowing them more
slack to wander blindly in their insolence. 16They have bought error
in exchange for guidance, so their trade reaps no pro ﬁt, and they are
not rightly guided. 17They are like people who [labour to] kindle a
ﬁre: when it lights up everything around them, God takes away all
their light, leaving them in utter darkness, unable to see– –18deaf,
dumb, and blind: they will never return. 19Or [like people who,
under] a cloudburst from the sky, with its darkness, thunder, and
lightning, put their ﬁngers into their ears to keep out the thunder-
claps for fear of death– – God surrounds the disbelievers. 20The
lightning almost snatches away their sight: whenever it ﬂashes on
aThis means regular and proper performance of the formal prayer ( salah ), as taught
by the Prophet Muhammad.
bYunﬁquna  in the Arabic of the Qur ᾿an literally means ‘spend’, on others, in good
causes, in the way of God.
cThe basic meaning of ῾adhab  is ‘to restrain (from doing wrong)’, extended to mean
anything di ﬃcult or painful, punishment, famine (see 23:78). See Majaz al-Qur ᾿an, by
῾Izz al-Din Ibn ῾Abdul-Salam (London: Al-Furqan Foundation, 1999 ),194, and E. W .
Lane, Arabic–English Lexicon  (Beirut: Librairie du Liban, 1968 ).The Cow 5 2:20them they walk on and when darkness falls around them they stand
still. If God so willed, He could take away their hearing and sight:God has power over everything.
21People, worship your Lord, who created you and those before
you, so that you may be mindful [of Him] 22who spread out the earth
for you and built the sky; who sent water down from it and with thatwater produced things for your sustenance. Do not, knowing this, setup rivals to God. 23If you have doubts about the revelation We have
sent down to Our servant, then produce a single sura like it– – enlist
whatever supporters
a you have other than God– – if you truly [think
you can]. 24If you cannot do this– – and you never will– – then beware
of the Fire prepared for the disbelievers, whose fuel is men and
stones.
25[Prophet], give those who believe and do good the news that
they will have Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams. Whenever
they are given sustenance from the fruits of these Gardens, they willsay, ‘We have been given this before,’ because they were providedwith something like it.
b They will have pure spouses and there they
will stay.
26God does not shy from drawing comparisons even with some-
thing as small as a gnat, or larger:c the believers know it is the truth
from their Lord, but the disbelievers say, ‘What does God mean bysuch a comparison?’ Through it He makes many go astray and leadsmany to the right path. But it is only the rebels He makes go astray:27those who break their covenant with God after it has been con-
ﬁrmed, who sever the bonds that God has commanded to be joined,
who spread corruption on the earth– – these are the losers. 28How can
you ignore God when you were lifeless and He gave you life, whenHe will cause you to die, then resurrect you to be returned to Him?29It was He who created all that is on the earth for you, then turned
to the sky and made the seven heavens; it is He who has knowledgeof all things.
aLiterally ‘whatever witnesses’. Razi interprets this as referring either to their idols
or to their leaders.
bOne interpretation is that they enjoy each meal so much that they are delighted to
see favourite dishes again; another interpretation is that the food of Paradise resemblesthe delicacies of this world in appearance.
cComparisons such as those given here were seen by some as inappropriate for God,
and this is an answer to these critics.The Qur ᾿an 2:21 630[Prophet], when your Lord told the angels, ‘I am putting a suc-
cessora on earth,’ they said, ‘How canb You put someone there who
will cause damage and bloodshed, when we celebrate Your praise andproclaim Your holiness?’ but He said, ‘I know things you do not.’31He taught Adam all the names [of things], then He showed them to
the angels and said, ‘Tell me the names of these if you truly [thinkyou can].’ 32They said, ‘May You be glori ﬁed! We have knowledge
only of what You have taught us. You are the All Knowing and All
Wise.’ 33Then He said, ‘Adam, tell them the names of these.’ When
he told them their names, God said, ‘Did I not tell you that I knowwhat is hidden in the heavens and the earth, and that I know whatyou reveal and what you conceal?’
34When We told the angels, ‘Bow down before Adam,’ they all
bowed. But not Iblis, who refused and was arrogant: he was one ofthe disobedient. 35We said, ‘Adam, live with your wife in this garden.
Both of you eat freely there as you will, but do not go near this tree,or you will both become wrongdoers.’ 36But Satan made them slip,
and removed them from the state they were in. We said, ‘Get out, allof you! You are each other’s enemy.
c On earth you will have a place
to stay and livelihood for a time.’ 37Then Adam received some
wordsd from his Lord and He accepted his repentance: He is the
Ever Relenting, the Most Merciful. 38We said, ‘Get out, all of
you! But when guidance comes from Me, as it certainly will, therewill be no fear for those who follow My guidance nor will they
grieve– –39those who disbelieve and deny Our messages shall be the
inhabitants of the Fire, and there they will remain.’
40Children of Israel, remember how I blessed you. Honour your
pledge to Me and I will honour My pledge to you: I am the One you
should fear. 41Believe in the message I have sent down con ﬁrming
what you already possess. Do not be the ﬁrst to disbelieve in it, and
aThe term khalifa  is normally translated as ‘vicegerent’ or ‘deputy’. While this is
one meaning of the term, its basic meaning is ‘successor’– – the Qur ᾿an often talks
about generations and individuals who are successors to each other, cf. 6:165,
7:129, etc.– – or a ‘trustee’ to whom a responsibility is temporarily given, cf. Moses and
Aaron, 7:142.
bThis is istifham inkari  in Arabic, i.e. not an interrogative but an exclamatory
statement normally expressing disapproval, best rendered in English by ‘How can you’.There are numerous examples of this in the Qur ᾿an.
cIblis is the enemy of mankind and vice versa. Iblis is also known as Shaytan/Satan.
dWords teaching Adam how to repent, see 7:23.The Cow 7 2:41do not sell My messages for a small price: I am the One of whom you
should be mindful. 42Do not mix truth with falsehood, or hide the
truth when you know it. 43Keep up the prayer, pay the prescribed
alms, and bow your heads [in worship] with those who bow theirs.44How can you tell people to do what is right and forget to do it
yourselves, even though you recite the Scripture? Have you nosense? 45Seek help with steadfastness and prayer– – though this is
hard indeed for anyone but the humble, 46who know
a that they will
meet their Lord and that it is to Him they will return.
47Children of Israel, remember how I blessed you and favoured
you over other people. 48Guard yourselves against a Day when no
soul will stand in place of another, no intercession will be acceptedfor it, nor any ransom; nor will they be helped. 49Remember when
We saved you from Pharaoh’s people, who subjected you to terrible
torment, slaughtering your sons and sparing only your women– –
this was a great trial from your Lord– –50and when We parted the
sea for you, so saving you and drowning Pharaoh’s people rightbefore your eyes. 51We appointed forty nights for Moses [on Mount
Sinai] and then, while he was away, you took to worshipping thecalf–– a terrible wrong. 52Even then We forgave you, so that you
might be thankful.
53Remember when We gave Moses the Scripture, and the means
to distinguish [right and wrong], so that you might be guided.54Moses said to his people, ‘My people, you have wronged yourselves
by worshipping the calf, so repent to your Maker and kill [the guiltyamong] you. That is the best you can do in the eyes of your Maker.’He accepted your repentance: He is the Ever Relenting and the MostMerciful. 55Remember when you said, ‘Moses, we will not believe
you until we see God face to face.’ At that, thunderbolts struck youas you looked on. 56Then We revived you after your death, so that
you might be thankful. 57We made the clouds cover you with shade,
and sent manna and quails down to you, saying, ‘Eat the good thingsWe have provided for you.’ It was not Us they wronged; theywronged themselves.
58Remember when We said, ‘Enter this town and eat freely there
as you will, but enter its gate humbly and say, “Relieve us!” Then We
aOne of the classical meanings of zanna  is ‘to know’ rather than the predominant
modern sense of ‘to think’. This term is used in the sense of knowledge several times inthe Qur ᾿an.The Qur ᾿an 2:42 8shall forgive you your sins and increase the rewards of those who do
good.’ 59But the wrongdoers substituted a di ﬀerent word from the
one they had been given. So, because they persistently disobeyed,We sent a plague down from the heavens upon the wrongdoers.
60Remember when Moses prayed for water for his people and We
said to him, ‘Strike the rock with your sta ﬀ.’ Twelve springs gushed
out, and each group knew its drinking place. ‘Eat and drink the
sustenance God has provided and do not cause corruption in theland.’ 61Remember when you said, ‘Moses, we cannot bear to eat only
one kind of food, so pray to your Lord to bring out for us some of the
earth’s produce, its herbs and cucumbers, its garlic, lentils, andonions.’ He said, ‘Would you exchange better for worse? Go to
Egypt and there you will ﬁnd what you have asked for.’ They were
struck with humiliation and wretchedness, and they incurred thewrath of God because they persistently rejected His messages andkilled prophets contrary to all that is right. All this was because theydisobeyed and were lawbreakers.
62The [Muslim] believers, the Jews, the Christians, and the
Sabians
a–– all those who believe in God and the Last Day and do
good– – will have their rewards with their Lord. No fear for them, nor
will they grieve. 63Remember when We took your pledge, and made
the mountain tower high above you, and said, ‘Hold fast to what Wehave given you and bear its contents in mind, so that you may beconscious of God.’ 64Even after that you turned away. Had it not
been for God’s favour and mercy on you, you would certainly havebeen lost. 65You know about those of you who broke the Sabbath,
and so We said to them, ‘Be like apes!
b Be outcasts!’ 23We made this
an example to those people who were there at the time and to thosewho came after them, and a lesson to all who are mindful of God.
67Remember when Moses said to his people, ‘God commands you
to sacri ﬁce a cow.’ They said, ‘Are you making fun of us?’ He
answered, ‘God forbid that I should be so ignorant.’ 68They said,
‘Call on your Lord for us, to show us what sort of cow it should be.’He answered, ‘God says it should be neither too old nor too young,
aThe Sabians were a monotheistic religious community. See M. Asad, The Message
of the Qur ᾿an (Gibraltar: Dar al-Andalus, 1997 ),40 n. 49.
bThis is understood by some as ‘physically turn into apes’ but in fact it is a ﬁgure of
speech– – the structure ‘be apes’ is like ‘be stones/iron’ in 17:50. Just as the Qur ᾿an
describes the disbelievers as blind, deaf, and dumb, here the transgressors are apes.The Cow 9 2:68but in between, so do as you are commanded.’ 69They said, ‘Call on
your Lord for us, to show us what colour it should be.’ He answered,‘God says it should be a bright yellow cow, pleasing to the eye.’70They said, ‘Call on your Lord for us, to show us [exactly] what it
is: all cows are more or less alike to us. With God’s will, we shall beguided.’ 71He replied, ‘It is a perfect and unblemished cow, not
trained to till the earth or water the ﬁelds.’ They said, ‘Now you have
brought the truth,’ and so they slaughtered it, though they almostfailed to do so. 72Then, when you [Israelites] killed someone and
started to blame one another– – although God was to bring what you
had concealed to light– –73We said, ‘Strike the [body] with a part of
[the cow]’: thus God brings the dead to life and shows His signs so
that you may understand. 74Even after that, your hearts became as
hard as rocks, or even harder, for there are rocks from which streamsspring out, and some from which water comes when they splitopen, and others which fall down in awe of God: He is not unawareof what you do.
75So can you [believers] hope that such people will believe you,
when some of them used to hear the words of God and then delib-
erately twist them, even when they understood them? 76When they
meet the believers, they say, ‘We too believe.’ But when they arealone with each other they say, ‘How could you tell them aboutGod’s revelation [to us]? They will be able to use it to argue againstyou before your Lord! Have you no sense?’ 77Do they not know that
God is well aware of what they conceal and what they reveal? 78Some
of them are uneducated, and know the Scripture only through wish-ful thinking. They rely on guesswork. 79So woe to those who write
something down with their own hands and then claim, ‘This is fromGod,’ in order to make some small gain. Woe to them for what theirhands have written! Woe to them for all that they have earned!80They say, ‘The Fire will only touch us for a few days.’ Say to them,
‘Have you received a promise from God– – for God never breaks His
promise– – or are you saying things about Him of which you have no
real knowledge?’ 81Truly those who do evil and are surrounded by
their sins will be the inhabitants of the Fire, there to remain, 82while
those who believe and do good deeds will be the inhabitants of theGarden, there to remain.
83Remember when We took a pledge from the Children of Israel:
‘Worship none but God; be good to your parents and kinsfolk, toThe Qur ᾿an 2:69 10orphans and the poor; speak good words to all people; keep up the
prayer and pay the prescribed alms.’ Then all but a few of youturned away and paid no heed. 84We took a pledge from you, ‘Do not
shed one another’s blood or drive one another from your homelands.’
You acknowledged it at the time, and you can testify to this. 85Yet
here you are, killing one another and driving some of your ownpeople from their homes, helping one another in sin and aggressionagainst them. If they come to you as captives, you still pay to setthem free, although you had no right to drive them out.
a So do you
believe in some parts of the Scripture and not in others? The pun-ishment for those of you who do this will be nothing but disgrace in
this life, and on the Day of Resurrection they will be condemned to
the harshest torment: God is not unaware of what you do. 86These
are the people who buy the life of this world at the price of the
Hereafter: their torment will not be lightened, nor will they be
helped.
87We gave Moses the Scripture and We sent messengers after
him in succession. We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear signs andstrengthened him with the Holy Spirit. So how is it that, whenevera messenger brings you something you do not like, you becomearrogant, calling some impostors and killing others? 88They say, ‘Our
hearts are impenetrably wrapped [against whatever you say],’ butGod has rejected
b them for their disbelief: they have little faith.
89When a Scripture came to them from God con ﬁrming what they
already had, and when they had been praying for victory against thedisbelievers, even when there came to them something they knew [tobe true], they disbelieved in it: God rejects those who disbelieve.90Low indeed is the price for which they have sold their souls by
denying the God-sent truth, out of envy that God should send Hisbounty to any of His servants He pleases. The disbelievers haveended up with wrath upon wrath, and a humiliating torment awaitsthem. 91When it is said to them, ‘Believe in God’s revelations,’ they
reply, ‘We believe in what was revealed to us,’ but they do not believein what came afterwards, though it is the truth con ﬁrming what they
aRazi: although the Jews fought each other in alliance with di ﬀerent Arab tribes,
when their side captured a Jew from another side, they would pay to have them released,as they said this was required by the Torah.
bLa ᾿ana in Arabic dictionaries gives the meaning of tarada ‘to reject’, ‘to drive away’
rather than ‘to curse’.The Cow 11 2:91already have. Say [Muhammad], ‘Why did you kill God’s prophets
in the past if you were true believers? 92Moses brought you clear
signs, but then, while he was away, you chose to worship the calf– –
you did wrong.’
93Remember when We took your pledge, making the mountain
tower above you, and said, ‘Hold on ﬁrmly to what We have given
you, and listen to [what We say].’ They said, ‘We hear and we dis-
obey,’ and through their disbelief they were made to drink [the loveof] the calf deep into their hearts. 94Say, ‘How evil are the things
your belief commands you to do, if you really are believers!’ Say, ‘If
the last home with God is to be for you alone and no one else, thenyou should long for death, if your claim is true.’ 95But they will
never long for death, because of what they have stored up with their
own hands: God is fully aware of the evildoers. 96[Prophet], you are
sure to ﬁnd them clinging to life more eagerly than any other people,
even the polytheists. Any of them would wish to be given a life of athousand years, though even such a long life would not save themfrom the torment: God sees everything they do.
97Say [Prophet], ‘If anyone is an enemy of Gabriel– – who by
God’s leave brought down the Qur ᾿an to your heart con ﬁrming pre-
vious scriptures as a guide and good news for the faithful– –98if
anyone is an enemy of God, His angels and His messengers, of
Gabriel and Michael, then God is certainly the enemy of such dis-believers.’ 99For We have sent down clear messages to you and only
those who defy [God] would refuse to believe them. 100How is it that
whenever they make a covenant or a pledge, some of them throw itaway? In fact, most of them do not believe.
101When God sent them a messenger con ﬁrming the Scriptures
they already had, some of those who had received the Scripturebefore threw the Book of God over their shoulders as if they had noknowledge, 102and followed what the evil ones had fabricated about
the Kingdom of Solomon instead. Not that Solomon himself was adisbeliever; it was the evil ones who were disbelievers. They taughtpeople witchcraft and what was revealed in Babylon to the twoangels Harut and Marut. Yet these two never taught anyone without
ﬁrst warning him, ‘We are sent only to tempt– – do not disbelieve.’
From these two, they learned what can cause discord between manand wife, although they harm no one with it except by God’s leave.They learned what harmed them, not what bene ﬁted them, knowingThe Qur ᾿an 2:92 12full well that whoever gained [this knowledge] would lose any share
in the Hereafter. Evil indeed is the [price] for which they sold theirsouls, if only they knew. 103If they had believed and been mindful
of God, their reward from Him would have been far better, if onlythey knew.
104Believers, do not say [to the Prophet], ‘ Ra ῾ina,’ but say,
‘Unzurna ,’
a and listen [to him]: an agonizing torment awaits those
who ignore [God’s words]. 105Neither those People of the Book who
disbelieve nor the idolaters would like anything good to be sent downto you from your Lord, but God chooses for His grace whoever Hewill: His bounty has no limits. 106Any revelation We cause to be
superseded or forgotten, We replace with something better or simi-lar. Do you [Prophet] not know that God has power over everything?107Do you not know that control of the heavens and the earth belongs
to Him? You [believers] have no protector or helper but God. 108Do
you wish to demand of your messenger something similar to whatwas demanded of Moses?
b Whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has
strayed far from the right path. 109Even after the truth has become
clear to them, many of the People of the Book wish they could turnyou back to disbelief after you have believed, out of their sel ﬁsh envy.
Forgive and forbear until God gives his command: He has powerover all things. 110Keep up the prayer and pay the prescribed alms.
Whatever good you store up for yourselves, you will ﬁnd it with
God: He sees everything you do.
111They also say, ‘No one will enter Paradise unless he is a Jew or a
Christian.’ This is their own wishful thinking. [Prophet], say, ‘Pro-duce your evidence, if you are telling the truth.’ 112In fact, any who
direct themselves
c wholly to God and do good will have their reward
with their Lord: no fear for them, nor will they grieve. 113The Jews
say, ‘The Christians have no ground whatsoever to stand on,’ andthe Christians say, ‘The Jews have no ground whatsoever to stand
on,’ though they both read the Scripture, and those who have no
aThe word ra ῾ina can be used politely as an expression for ‘look at us’. However, a
group of Jews in Medina hostile to Muhammad subtly changed its pronunciation toimply ‘you are foolish’ or ‘you herd our sheep’ in order to abuse the Prophet. So thebelievers are advised to avoid the word and use unzurna , also meaning ‘look at us’,
instead. See 4:46.
bSee2:55 and 4:153.
cLiterally ‘their faces’. One meaning of wajh  (face) is ‘direction’ and the basic
meaning of aslama  is ‘devote’. See note to 2:128.The Cow 13 2:113knowledge say the same; God will judge between them on the Day of
Resurrection concerning their di ﬀerences.
114Who could be more wicked than those who prohibit the
mention of God’s name in His places of worshipa and strive to have
them deserted? Such people should not enter them without fear:there is disgrace for them in this world and painful punishmentin the Hereafter. 115The East and the West belong to God: wherever
you turn, there is His Face.
b God is all pervading and all knowing.
116Theyc have asserted, ‘God has a child.’ May He be exalted! No!
Everything in the heavens and earth belongs to Him, everythingdevoutly obeys His will. 117He is the Originator of the heavens and
the earth, and when He decrees something, He says only, ‘Be,’ and it
is. 118Those who have no knowledge also say, ‘If only God would
speak to us!’ or ‘If only a miraculous sign would come to us!’People before them said the same things: their hearts are all alike. Wehave made Our signs clear enough to those who have solid faith.119We have sent you [Prophet] with the truth, bearing good news and
warning. You will not be responsible for the inhabitants of the Blaze.120The Jews and the Christians will never be pleased with you unless
you follow their ways. Say, ‘God’s guidance is the only true guid-ance.’ If you were to follow their desires after the knowledge that hascome to you, you would ﬁnd no one to protect you from God or help
you. 121Those to whom We have given the Scripture, who follow it as
it deserves,
d are the ones who truly believe in it. Those who deny its
truth will be the losers.
122Children of Israel, remember how I blessed you and favoured
you over other people, 123and beware of a Day when no soul can
stand in for another. No compensation will be accepted from it,nor intercession be of use to it, nor will anyone be helped. 124When
Abraham’s Lord tested him with certain commandments, whichhe ful ﬁlled, He said, ‘I will make you a leader of people.’ Abraham
asked, ‘And will You make leaders from my descendants too?’ God
answered, ‘My pledge does not hold for those who do evil.’
aRazi suggests that this probably alludes to the Jews’ objections to the change of
qibla  (direction of prayer) from Jerusalem to Mecca and their e ﬀorts to stop people
praying towards Mecca in the Prophet’s mosque in Medina (see 2:115 and 142).
bOr ‘His direction’.
cRazi suggests that this refers to the pagan Arabs (see 16:57) and (some of ) the
Christians and Jews (see 9:30).
dThis can also mean ‘who read it as it ought to be read’.The Qur ᾿an 2:114 14125We made the Housea a resort and a sanctuary for people,
saying, ‘Take the spot where Abraham stood as your place ofprayer.’ We commanded Abraham and Ishmael: ‘Purify My Housefor those who walk round it, those who stay there, and those whobow and prostrate themselves in worship.’ 126Abraham said, ‘My
Lord, make this land secure and provide with produce those ofits people who believe in God and the Last Day.’ God said, ‘Asfor those who disbelieve, I will grant them enjoyment for a shortwhile and then subject them to the torment of the Fire– – an evil
destination.’
127As Abraham and Ishmael built up the foundations of the House
[they prayed], ‘Our Lord, accept [this] from us. You are the All
Hearing, the All Knowing. 128Our Lord, make us devoted
b to You;
make our descendants into a community devoted to You. Show ushow to worship and accept our repentance, for You are the EverRelenting, the Most Merciful. 129Our Lord, make a messenger of
their own rise up from among them, to recite Your revelations tothem, teach them the Scripture and wisdom, and purify them: Youare the Mighty, the Wise.’
130Who but a fool would forsake the religion of Abraham? We have
chosen him in this world and he will rank among the righteous in
the Hereafter. 131His Lord said to him, ‘Devote yourself to Me.’
Abraham replied, ‘I devote myself to the Lord of the Universe,’132and commanded his sons to do the same, as did Jacob: ‘My sons,
God has chosen [your] religion for you, so make sure you devoteyourselves to Him, to your dying moment.’
133Were you [Jews] there to see when death came upon Jacob?
When he said to his sons, ‘What will you worship after I am gone?’they replied, ‘We shall worship your God and the God of yourfathers, Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac, one single God: we devoteourselves to Him.’
c134That community passed away. What they
earned belongs to them, and what you earn belongs to you: you willnot be answerable for their deeds.
135They say, ‘Become Jews or Christians, and you will be rightly
aThe Ka ῾ba at Mecca.
bAslama  here means to devote oneself to the one God alone, so that Abraham will
come to his Lord with his heart totally devoted to Him: 3:64;26:89;37:84.
c‘One single God’ reinforces the interpretation of islam  as ‘devotion’, one meaning
ofaslama (al-Mu ῾jam al-Wasit ).The Cow 15 2:135guided.’ Say [Prophet], ‘No, [ours is] the religion of Abraham, the
upright, who did not worship any god besides God.’ 136So [you
believers], say, ‘We believe in God and in what was sent down to usand what was sent down to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and theTribes, and what was given to Moses, Jesus, and all the prophets bytheir Lord. We make no distinction between any of them, and wedevote ourselves to Him.’ 137So if they believe like you do, they will
be rightly guided. But if they turn their backs, then they will beentrenched in opposition. God will protect you from them: He is the
All Hearing, the All Knowing. And say [believers], 138‘[Our life]
takes its colour from God, and who gives a better colour than God?It is Him we worship.’
139Say [Prophet] [to the Jews and Christians], ‘How can you argue
with us about God when He is our Lord and your Lord? Our deedsbelong to us, and yours to you. We devote ourselves entirely to Him.140Or are you saying that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the
Tribes were Jews or Christians?’ [Prophet], ask them, ‘Who knowsbetter: you or God? Who could be more wicked than those who hidea testimony [they received] from God? God is not unmindful ofwhat you do.’ 141That community passed away: what they earned
belongs to them, and what you earn belongs to you. You will not be
answerable for their deeds.
142The foolish people will say, ‘What has turned them away from
the prayer direction they used to face?’
a Say, ‘East and West belong
to God. He guides whoever He will to the right way.’ 143We have
made you [believers] into a just community,b so that you may bear
witness [to the truth] before others and so that the Messenger maybear witness [to it] before you. We only made the direction the oneyou used to face [Prophet] in order to distinguish those who followthe Messenger from those who turn on their heels: that test washard, except for those God has guided. God would never let yourfaith go to waste [believers],
c for God is most compassionate and
most merciful towards people. 144Many a time We have seen you
[Prophet] turn your face towards Heaven, so We are turning you
aThis refers to the change in the Muslims’ prayer direction from Jerusalem to
Mecca in the second year of the Hijra.
bLiterally ‘a middle nation’.
cThis reassured those who asked whether the prayers said towards Jerusalem had
been wasted.The Qur ᾿an 2:136 16towards a prayer direction that pleases you.a Turn your face in the
direction of the Sacred Mosque: wherever you [believers] may be,turn your faces to it. Those who were given the Scripture know withcertainty that this is the Truth from their Lord: God is not unawareof what they do. 145Yet even if you brought every proof to those who
were given the Scripture, they would not follow your prayer direc-tion, nor will you follow theirs, nor indeed will any of them followone another’s direction. If you [Prophet] were to follow their desires,after the knowledge brought to you, you would be doing wrong.146Those We gave Scripture know it as well as they know their own
sons, but some of them hide the truth that they know. 147The truth is
from your Lord, so do not be one of those who doubt. 148Each
community has its own direction to which it turns: race to do good
deeds and wherever you are, God will bring you together.
b God has
power to do everything.
149[Prophet], wherever you may have started out, turn your face in
the direction of the Sacred Mosque– – this is the truth from your
Lord: He is not unaware of what you do– –150wherever you may have
started out, turn your face in the direction of the Sacred Mosque;
wherever any of you may be, turn your faces towards it, so that
people may have no argument against youc–– except for the wrong-
doers among them: do not fear them; fear Me– – and so that I may
perfect My favour on you and you may be guided, 151just as Wed
have sent among you a Messenger of your own to recite Our rev-
elations to you, purify you and teach you the Scripture, wisdom,and [other] things you did not know. 152So remember Me; I will
remember you. Be thankful to Me, and never ungrateful.
153You who believe, seek help through steadfastness and prayer,
for God is with the steadfast. 154Do not say that those who are killed
in God’s cause are dead; they are alive, though you do not realize it.155We shall certainly test you with fear and hunger, and loss of
aThe Prophet secretly hoped to be allowed to face the Mosque in Mecca in prayer, as
it was so dear to him, being built by Abraham and Ishmael, as seen from verse 127
onwards.
bOn the Day of Judgement, cf. 5:48.
cBoth Jews and polytheists questioned the choice of qibla  (prayer direction) for their
own reasons.
dNote the shift in pronoun from singular to plural of majesty (see Introduction,
p. xx).The Cow 17 2:155property, lives, and crops. But [Prophet], give good news to those
who are steadfast, 156those who say, when a ﬄicted with a calamity,
‘We belong to God and to Him we shall return.’ 157These will be
given blessings and mercy from their Lord, and it is they who arerightly guided.
158Safa and Marwa
a are among the rites of God, so for those who
make major or minorb pilgrimage to the Housec it is no o ﬀence to
circulate between the two.d Anyone who does good of his own accord
will be rewarded, for God rewards good deeds, and knows every-thing. 159As for those who hide the proofs and guidance We send
down, after We have made them clear to people in the Scripture,God rejects them, and so do others, 160unless they repent, make
amends, and declare the truth. I will certainly accept their repent-
ance: I am the Ever Relenting, the Most Merciful. 161As for those
who disbelieve and die as disbelievers, God rejects them, as do theangels and all people. 162They will remain in this state of rejection:
their punishment will not be lightened, nor will they be reprieved.
163Your God is the one God: there is no god except Him, the Lord
of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy. 164In the creation of the heavens and
earth; in the alternation of night and day; in the ships that sail theseas with goods for people; in the water which God sends down fromthe sky to give life to the earth when it has been barren, scattering allkinds of creatures over it; in the changing of the winds and cloudsthat run their appointed courses between the sky and earth: there aresigns in all these for those who use their minds. 165Even so, there are
some who choose to worship others besides God as rivals to Him,loving them with the love due to God, but the believers have greaterlove for God. If only the idolaters could see– – as they will see
when they face the torment– – that all power belongs to God, and
that God punishes severely. 166When those who have been followed
disown their followers, when they all see the su ﬀering, when all
aTwo hills adjacent to the Ka ῾ba between which a pilgrim and visitor should walk up
and down in commemoration of what Hagar did in search of water for her baby,Ishmael.
bThe minor pilgrimage ( ῾umra ) can be done during the pilgrimage season or at any
other time during the year.
cThe Ka ῾ba, which is central both to the direction of prayer and to the rites of
pilgrimage as established by Abraham at God’s command.
dThe Muslims were reluctant to perform this rite, as the polytheists had installed
two idols on these hills. Here it is reclaimed for God.The Qur ᾿an 2:156 18bonds between them are severed, 167the followers will say, ‘If only we
had one last chance, we would disown them as they now disown us.’In this way, God will make them see their deeds as a source of bitterregret: they shall not leave the Fire.
168People, eat what is good and lawful from the earth, and do not
follow Satan’s footsteps, for he is your sworn enemy. 169He always
commands you to do what is evil and indecent, and to say things
about God that you do not really know.
a170But when it is said to
them, ‘Follow the message that God has sent down,’ they answer,‘We follow the ways of our fathers.’ What! Even though their fathersunderstood nothing and were not guided? 171Calling to disbelievers
b
is like a herdsman calling to things that hear nothing but a shout and
a cry: they are deaf, dumb, and blind, and they understand nothing.172You who believe, eat the good things We have provided for you
and be grateful to God, if it is Him that you worship. 173He has only
forbidden you carrion, blood, pig’s meat, and animals over which anyname other than God’s has been invoked. But if anyone is forced toeat such things by hunger, rather than desire or excess, he commitsno sin: God is most merciful and forgiving.
174As for those who conceal the Scripture that God sent down and
sell it for a small price, they only ﬁll their bellies with Fire. God will
not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He purifythem: an agonizing torment awaits them. 175These are the ones who
exchange guidance for error, and forgiveness for torment. What canmake them patient in the face of the Fire? 176This is because God has
sent the Scripture with the Truth; those who pursue di ﬀerences in
the Scripture are deeply entrenched in opposition.
177Goodness does not consist in turning your face towards East or
West. The truly good are those who believe in God and the Last Day,in the angels, the Scripture, and the prophets; who give away someof their wealth, however much they cherish it, to their relatives, toorphans, the needy, travellers and beggars, and to liberate those inbondage; those who keep up the prayer and pay the prescribed alms;
who keep pledges whenever they make them; who are steadfast in
misfortune, adversity, and times of danger. These are the ones whoare true, and it is they who are aware of God.
aSee6:138,145.
bIt is also possible to interpret this as referring to the disbelievers calling on their
idols, who cannot respond.The Cow 19 2:177178You who believe, fair retributiona is prescribed for you in cases
of murder: the free man for the free man, the slave for the slave, thefemale for the female.
b But if the culprit is pardoned by his
aggrieved brother, this shall be adhered to fairly, and the culprit shallpay what is due in a good way. This is an alleviation from your Lordand an act of mercy. If anyone then exceeds these limits, grievoussuﬀering awaits him. 179Fair retribution saves life for you, people of
understanding, so that you may guard yourselves against what iswrong.
When death approaches one of you who leaves wealth, 180it is
prescribed that he should make a proper bequest to parents and closerelatives– – a duty incumbent on those who are mindful of God. 181If
anyone alters the bequest after hearing it, the guilt of the alterationwill fall on them: God is all hearing and all knowing. 182But if anyone
knows
c that the testator has made a mistake, or done wrong, and so
puts things right between the parties, he will incur no sin: God ismost forgiving and merciful.
183You who believe, fasting is prescribed for you, as it was pre-
scribed for those before you, so that you may be mindful of God.184Fast for a speci ﬁc number of days, but if one of you is ill, or on a
journey, on other days later. For those who can fast only with extremediﬃculty, there is a way to compensate– – feed a needy person. But if
anyone does good of his own accord, it is better for him, and fasting isbetter for you, if only you knew. 185It was in the month of Ramadan
that the Qur ᾿an was revealed as guidance for mankind, clear messages
giving guidance and distinguishing between right and wrong. So anyone of you who is present that month should fast, and anyone who isill or on a journey should make up for the lost days by fasting on otherdays later. God wants ease for you, not hardship. He wants you tocomplete the prescribed period and to glorify Him for having guidedyou, so that you may be thankful. 186[Prophet], if My servants ask you
about Me, I am near. I respond to those who call Me, so let themrespond to Me, and believe in Me, so that they may be guided.
aqisas etymologically means ‘to track down’.
bBefore Islam, the Arabs did not observe equality in retribution, but a stronger tribe
would demand more, e.g. a man for a woman, a free man for a slave, or several men forone man, likewise for ﬁnancial compensation. The intention of this verse is to insist on
equality.
cOne meaning of khafa  is ‘to know’ ( al-Mu ῾jam al-Wasit ).The Qur ᾿an 2:178 20187You [believers] are permitted to lie with your wives during the
night of the fast: they are [close] as garments to you, as you are tothem. God was aware that you were betraying yourselves,
a so He
turned to you in mercy and pardoned you: now you can lie withthem– – seek what God has ordained for you– – eat and drink until the
white thread of dawn becomes distinct from the black. Then fastuntil nightfall. Do not lie with them during the nights of yourdevotional retreat in the mosques: these are the bounds set by God,so do not go near them. In this way God makes His messages clearto people, that they may guard themselves against doing wrong.188Do not consume your property wrongfully, nor use it to bribe
judges, intending sinfully and knowingly to consume parts of otherpeople’s property.
189They ask you [Prophet] about crescent moons. Say, ‘They show
the times appointed for people, and for the pilgrimage.’ Goodnessdoes not consist of entering houses by the back [door];
b the truly
good person is the one who is mindful of God. So enter your housesby their [main] doors and be mindful of God so that you mayprosper. 190Fight in God’s cause against those who ﬁght you, but do
not overstep the limits:
c God does not love those who overstep the
limits. 191Kill them wherever you encounter them,d and drive them
out from where they drove you out, for persecution is more seriousthan killing.
e Do not ﬁght them at the Sacred Mosque unless they
ﬁght you there. If they do ﬁght you, kill them– – this is what such
disbelievers deserve– –192but if they stop, then God is most forgiving
and merciful. 193Fight them until there is no more persecution, and
aSome Muslims admitted to the Prophet that they had spoiled their fast by having
sexual relations during the nights of Ramadan.
bIt was the custom of some Arabs on returning from the pilgrimage to enter their
houses by the back door, considering this to be an act of piety.
cThe Arabic command la ta ῾tadu is so general that commentators have agreed that it
includes prohibition of starting hostilities, ﬁghting non-combatants, disproportionate
response to aggression, etc.
dThe Muslims were concerned as to whether it was permitted to retaliate when
attacked within the sacred precincts in Mecca when on pilgrimage (see 2:196 and Razi’s
Tafsir ). They are here given permission to ﬁght back wherever they encounter their
attackers, in the precinct or outside it.
e‘Persecuting you unlawfully is worse than you killing them in the precincts in self-
defence.’ The article al- in Arabic sometimes takes the place of a pronoun, as here ‘their
persecution’ and ‘your killing them’ (Tammam Hassan, al-Bayan , Cairo, 1993 ,118–45);
it is not the generic al-, cf. 2:217. See also 2:217.The Cow 21 2:193worshipab is devoted to God. If they cease hostilities, there can
be no [further] hostility, except towards aggressors. 194A sacred
month for a sacred month: violation of sanctity [calls for] fair retri-bution. So if anyone commits aggression against you, attack him ashe attacked you, but be mindful of God, and know that He is withthose who are mindful of Him. 195Spend in God’s cause: do not
contribute to your destruction with your own hands,
c but do good,
for God loves those who do good.
196Complete the pilgrimages, major and minor, for the sake of
God. If you are prevented [from doing so], then [send] whateveroﬀering for sacri ﬁce you can a ﬀord, and do not shave your heads
d
until the o ﬀering has reached the place of sacri ﬁce. If any of you is
ill, or has an ailment of the scalp, he should compensate by fasting,or feeding the poor, or o ﬀering sacri ﬁce. When you are in safety,
anyone wishing to take a break
e between the minor pilgrimage and
the major one must make whatever o ﬀering he can a ﬀord. If he
lacks the means, he should fast for three days during the pilgrim-
age, and seven days on his return, making ten days in all. Thisapplies to those whose household is not near the Sacred Mosque.
Always be mindful of God, and be aware that He is stern in Hisretribution.
197The pilgrimage takes place during the prescribed months.
There should be no indecent speech, misbehaviour, or quarrellingfor anyone undertaking the pilgrimage– – whatever good you do, God
is well aware of it. Provide well for yourselves: the best provisionis to be mindful of God– – always be mindful of Me, you who have
understanding– –198but it is no o ﬀence to seek some bounty from
your Lord.
f When you surge down from Arafat remember God at
the sacred place.g Remember Him: He has guided you. Before that
aWorship at the sacred mosque.
bCf. 8:39 and note e to 2:191 above.
cIf they are not prepared to pay for what it takes to defend themselves, then they will
bring ruin on themselves. The verse is also understood generally to outlaw suicide andother forms of self-harm.
dShaving the head or cutting the hair is one of the rites performed by male pilgrims
after most of the other rites have been completed.
eThis means breaking the restrictions of ihram  (consecration) termed tamattu ῾.
fIt is lawful to trade while on pilgrimage.
gThis is one of the sites of the pilgrimage between Arafat and Mina– – a plain called
Muzdalifa.The Qur ᾿an 2:194 22you were astray. 199Surge down where the rest of the people do,a and
ask forgiveness of God: He is most forgiving and merciful. 200When
you have completed your rites, remember God as much as youremember your own fathers, or even more. There are some who pray,‘Our Lord, give us good in this world,’ and they will have no share inthe Hereafter; 201others pray, ‘Our Lord, give us good in this world
and in the Hereafter, and protect us from the torment of the Fire.’202They will have the share they have worked for: God is swift in
reckoning.
203Remember God on the appointed days.
b If anyone is in a hurry
to leave after two days, there is no blame on him, nor is there anyblame on anyone who stays on, so long as they are mindful of God.Be mindful of God, and remember that you will be gathered to Him.204There is [a kind of] man whose views on the life of this world may
please you [Prophet], he even calls on God to witness what is in his
heart, yet he is the bitterest of opponents. 205When he leaves, he sets
out to spread corruption in the land, destroying crops and live-stock– – God does not like corruption. 206When he is told, ‘Beware of
God,’ his arrogance leads him to sin. Hell is enough for him: adreadful resting place. 207But there is also a kind of man who gives
his life away to please God, and God is most compassionate to Hisservants. 208You who believe, enter wholeheartedly into submission
to God
c and do not follow in Satan’s footsteps, for he is your sworn
enemy. 209If you slip back after clear proof has come to you, then be
aware that God is almighty and wise.
210Are these people waiting for God to come to them in the
shadows of the clouds, together with the angels? But the matterwould already have been decided by then:
d all matters are brought
back to God. 211[Prophet], ask the Children of Israel how many clear
signs We brought them. If anyone alters God’s blessings after he has
received them, God is stern in punishment. 212The life of this world
is made to seem glamorous to the disbelievers, and they laugh at
those who believe. But those who are mindful of God will be above
aSome arrogant tribes used to take a di ﬀerent route from the masses.
bThese come after the day of sacri ﬁce, when two or three days are spent in Mina to
perform the rite of stoning the Devil.
cSilm , which also means ‘peace’.
dIt will be too late for them to repent.The Cow 23 2:212them on the Day of Resurrection: God provides immeasurably for
whoever He pleases. 213Mankind was a single community, then God
sent prophets to bring good news and warning, and with them Hesent the Scripture with the Truth, to judge between people in theirdisagreements. It was only those to whom it was given who disagreedabout it after clear signs had come to them, because of rivalrybetween them. So by His leave God guided the believers to the truththey had di ﬀered about: God guides whoever He will to a straight
path.
214Do you suppose that you will enter the Garden without ﬁrst
having su ﬀered like those before you? They were a ﬄicted by mis-
fortune and hardship, and they were so shaken that even [their]
messenger and the believers with him cried, ‘When will God’s help
arrive?’ Truly, God’s help is near. 215They ask you [Prophet] what
they should give. Say, ‘Whatever you give should be for parents,close relatives, orphans, the needy, and travellers. God is well awareof whatever good you do.
216Fighting is ordained for you, though you dislike it. You may
dislike something although it is good for you, or like somethingalthough it is bad for you: God knows and you do not.’ 217They ask
you [Prophet] about ﬁghting in the prohibited month. Say, ‘Fighting
in that month is a great o ﬀence, but to bar others from God’s path,
to disbelieve in Him, prevent access to the Sacred Mosque, and expelits people, are still greater o ﬀences in God’s eyes: persecution is
worse than killing.’
a They will not stop ﬁghting you [believers] until
they make you revoke your faith, if they can. If any of you revokeyour faith and die as disbelievers, your deeds will come to nothing inthis world and the Hereafter, and you will be inhabitants of the Fire,there to remain. 218But those who have believed, migrated, and
striven for God’s cause, it is they who can look forward to God’smercy: God is most forgiving and merciful.
219They ask you [Prophet] about intoxicants and gambling: say,
‘There is great sin in both, and some bene ﬁt for people: the sin is
greater than the bene ﬁt.’ They ask you what they should give: say,
‘Give what you can spare.’ In this way, God makes His messagesclear to you, so that you may re ﬂect 220on this world and the next.
aTo persecute people for believing in God is a worse o ﬀence than for the aggrieved
party to ﬁght back in the prohibited month. This further explains verse 191.The Qur ᾿an 2:213 24They ask you about [the property of] orphans: say, ‘It is good to set
things right for them. If you combine their a ﬀairs with yours,
remember they are your brothers and sisters: God knows those whospoil things and those who improve them. Had He so willed, Hecould have made you vulnerable too: He is almighty and wise.’
221Do not marry idolatresses until they believe: a believing slave
woman is certainly better than an idolatress, even though she may
please you. And do not give your women in marriage to idolatersuntil they believe: a believing slave is certainly better than an idol-
ater, even though he may please you. Such people call [you] to the
Fire, while God calls [you] to the Garden and forgiveness by Hisleave. He makes His messages clear to people, so that they may bear
them in mind.
222They ask you [Prophet] about menstruation. Say, ‘Menstru-
ation is a painful condition, so keep away from women during it. Donot approach them until they are cleansed; when they are cleansed,you may approach them as God has ordained.
a God loves those who
turn to Him, and He loves those who keep themselves clean. 223Your
wives are your ﬁelds, so go into your ﬁelds whichever way you like,b
and send [something good] ahead for yourselves. Be mindful of God:
remember that you will meet Him.’ [Prophet], give good news to thebelievers.
224[Believers], do not allow your oaths in God’s name to hinder you
from doing good, being mindful of God and making peace betweenpeople. God hears and knows everything: 225He will not call you to
account for oaths you have uttered unintentionally, but He will call
you to account for what you mean in your hearts. God is mostforgiving and forbearing. 226For those who swear that they will not
approach their wives, there shall be a waiting period of four months:
c
if they go back, remember God will be most forgiving and merciful,227but if they are determined to divorce, remember that God hears
and knows all. 228Divorced women must wait for three monthly
periods before remarrying, and, if they really believe in God and the
aThe Arabic expressions used here are clear euphemisms for ‘do not have sexual
intercourse with them’.
bWhen the Muslims emigrated to Medina, they heard from the Jews that a child
born from a woman approached from behind would have a squint.
cBefore Islam, husbands could make such an oath and suspend the wife inde ﬁn-
itely. In Islam, if they do not go back after four months, divorce becomes e ﬀective.The Cow 25 2:228Last Day, it is not lawful for them to conceal what God has created in
their wombs: their husbands would do better to take them backduring this period, provided they wish to put things right. Wiveshave [rights] similar to their [obligations], according to what isrecognized to be fair, and husbands have a degree [of right] overthem: [both should remember that] God is almighty and wise.
229Divorce can happen twice, and [each time] wives either be kept
on in an acceptable manner or released in a good way. It is not lawfulfor you to take back anything that you have given [your wives], except
where both fear that they cannot maintain [the marriage] within the
bounds set by God: if you [arbiters] suspect that the couple may notbe able to do this, then there will be no blame on either of them if the
woman opts to give something for her release.
a These are the bounds
set by God: do not overstep them. It is those who overstep God’sbounds who are doing wrong. 230If a husband re-divorces his wife
after the second divorce, she will not be lawful for him until she hastaken another husband; if that one divorces her, there will be noblame if she and the ﬁrst husband return to one another, provided
they feel that they can keep within the bounds set by God. These areGod’s bounds, which He makes clear for those who know.
231When you divorce women and they have reached their set time,
then either keep or release them in a fair manner. Do not hold on to
them with intent to harm them and commit aggression: anyone whodoes this wrongs himself. Do not make a mockery of God’s revela-tions; remember the favour He blessed you with, and the Scriptureand wisdom He sent to teach you. Be mindful of God and know thatHe has full knowledge of everything. 232When you divorce women
and they have reached their set time, do not prevent them fromremarrying their husbands if they both agree to do so in a fairmanner.
b Let those of you who believe in God and the Last Day take
this to heart: that is more wholesome and purer for you. God knowsand you do not.
233Mothers suckle their children for two whole years, if they wish
to complete the term, and clothing and maintenance must be borne
by the father in a fair manner. No one should be burdened with morethan they can bear: no mother shall be made to su ﬀer harm on
aBy paying back all or part of the dowry in return for divorce.
bSometimes a woman’s father or brother would interfere to stop her reconciling with
her husband. Here the Qur ᾿an condemns such interference.The Qur ᾿an 2:229 26account of her child, nor any father on account of his. The same
duty is incumbent on the father’s heir.a If, by mutual consent and
consultation, the couple wish to wean [the child], they will not beblamed, nor will there be any blame if you wish to engage a wetnurse, provided you pay as agreed in a fair manner. Be mindful ofGod, knowing that He sees everything you do.
234If any of you die and leave widows, the widows should wait for
four months and ten nights before remarrying. When they have
completed this set time, you will not be blamed for anything theymay reasonably choose to do with themselves. God is fully aware ofwhat you do. 235You will not be blamed whether you give a hint that
you wish to marry these women, or keep it to yourselves– – God
knows that you intend to propose
b to them. Do not make a secret
arrangement with them; speak to them honourably and do not con-ﬁrm the marriage tie until the prescribed period reaches its end.
Remember that God knows what is in your souls, so be mindful ofHim. Remember that God is most forgiving and forbearing.
236You will not be blamed if you divorce women when you have
not yet consummated the marriage or ﬁxed a bride-gift for them, but
make fair provision for them, the rich according to his means and thepoor according to his– – this is a duty for those who do good. 237If you
divorce wives before consummating the marriage but after ﬁxing a
bride-gift for them, then give them half of what you had previouslyﬁxed, unless they waive [their right], or unless the one who holds the
marriage tie waives [his right]. Waiving [your right] is nearer togodliness, so do not forget to be generous towards one another: Godsees what you do. 238Take care to do your prayers,
c praying in the
best way,d and stand before God in devotion. 239If you are in danger,
pray when you are out walking or riding; when you are safe again,remember God, for He has taught you what you did not know.
240If any of you die and leave widows, make a bequest for them: a
year’s maintenance and no expulsion from their homes [for that
time]. But if they leave of their own accord, you will not be blamedfor what they may reasonably choose to do with themselves: God is
aIf he dies.
bDhakara  in classical Arabic meant ‘to propose’.
cTo secure that the parties in such a bitter situation will abide by the Qur ᾿an’s
teaching they are instructed to pray and stand before God.
dAnother interpretation is ‘including the middle prayer’, with various opinions as to
which prayer is meant.The Cow 27 2:240almighty and wise. 241Divorced women shall also have such mainten-
ance as is considered fair: this is a duty for those who are mindful ofGod. 242In this way God makes His revelations clear to you, so that
you may grow in understanding.
243[Prophet], consider those people who abandoned their home-
land in fear of death,
a even though there were thousands of them.
God said to them, ‘Die!’ and then brought them back to life again;God shows real favour to people, but most of them are ungrateful.244Fight
b in God’s cause and remember that He is all hearing and all
knowing. 245Who will give God a good loan, which He will increase
for him many times over? It is God who withholds and God whogives abundantly, and it is to Him that you will return.
246[Prophet], consider the leaders of the Children of Israel who
came after Moses, when they said to one of their prophets, ‘Set up aking for us and we shall ﬁght in God’s cause.’ He said, ‘But could it
be that you would not ﬁght, if it were ordained for you?’ They said,
‘How could we not ﬁght in God’s cause when we and our children
have been driven out of our homeland?’ Yet when they were com-
manded to ﬁght, all but a few of them turned away: God has full
knowledge of those who do wrong. 247Their prophet said to them,
‘God has now appointed Talut
c to be your king,’ but they said, ‘How
can he be king over us when we have a greater right to rule than he?He does not even have great wealth.’ He said, ‘God has chosen himover you, and has given him great knowledge and stature. Godgrants His authority to whoever He pleases: God is magnanimous,all knowing.’ 248Their prophet said to them, ‘The sign of his author-
ity will be that the Ark [of the Covenant] will come to you. In it therewill be [the gift of] tranquillity from your Lord and relics of the
followers of Moses and Aaron, carried by the angels. There is a sign
in this for you if you believe.’
249When Talut set out with his forces, he said to them, ‘God will
test you with a river. Anyone who drinks from it will not belong with
me, but anyone who refrains from tasting it will belong with me; ifhe scoops up just one handful [he will be excused].’ But they alldrank [deep] from it, except for a few. When he crossed it with those
aSee verse 246 below.
bAfter dealing with marital issues, the Qur ᾿an returns to the question of retaliation.
cThe Arabic name for Saul.The Qur ᾿an 2:241 28who had kept faith, theya said, ‘We have no strength today against
Goliath and his warriors.’ But those who knew that they were goingto meet their Lord said, ‘How often a small force has defeated a largearmy with God’s permission! God is with those who are steadfast.’250And when they met Goliath and his warriors, they said, ‘Our
Lord, pour patience on us, make us stand ﬁrm, and help us against
the disbelievers,’ 251and so with God’s permission they defeated
them. David killed Goliath, and God gave him sovereignty and wis-
dom and taught him what He pleased. If God did not drive someback by means of others the earth would be completely corrupt, butGod is bountiful to all.
252These are the revelations of God which We recite to you
[Muhammad] with the truth, and you truly are one of the messen-gers. 253We favoured some of these messengers above others. God
spoke to some; others He raised in rank; We gave Jesus, son of Mary,Our clear signs and strengthened him with the holy spirit. If Godhad so willed, their successors would not have fought each otherafter they had been brought clear signs. But they disagreed: somebelieved and some disbelieved. If God had so willed, they would nothave fought each other, but God does what He will.
254You who believe, give from what We have provided for you,
before the Day comes when there is no bargaining, no friendship,and no intercession. It is the disbelievers who are wrong. 255God:
there is no god but Him, the Ever Living, the Ever Watchful.
b
Neither slumber nor sleep overtakes Him. All that is in the heavensand in the earth belongs to Him. Who is there that can intercedewith Him except by His leave? He knows what is before them andwhat is behind them, but they do not comprehend any of Hisknowledge except what He wills. His throne extends over theheavens and the earth; it does not weary Him to preserve them both.He is the Most High, the Tremendous.
256There is no compulsion in religion: true guidance has become
distinct from error, so whoever rejects false gods and believes in Godhas grasped the ﬁrmest hand-hold, one that will never break. God is
all hearing and all knowing. 257God is the ally of those who believe:
He brings them out of the depths of darkness and into the light. As
aThose who had drunk the water or some of the few who went with Talut.
bCf. 13:33.The Cow 29 2:257for the disbelievers, their allies are false gods who take them from the
light into the depths of darkness, they are the inhabitants of the Fire,and there they will remain.
258[Prophet], have you not thought about the man who disputed
with Abraham about his Lord, because God had given him power torule? When Abraham said, ‘It is my Lord who gives life and death,’he said, ‘I too give life and death.’ So Abraham said, ‘God brings thesun from the east; so bring it from the west.’ The disbeliever wasdumbfounded: God does not guide those who do evil.
259Or take the one who passed by a ruined town. He said, ‘How
will God give this life when it has died?’ So God made him die for ahundred years, and then raised him up, saying, ‘How long did you
stay like that?’ He answered, ‘A day, or part of a day.’ God said, ‘No,
you stayed like that for a hundred years. Look at your food anddrink: they have not gone bad. Look at your donkey– – We will make
you a sign for the people– – look at the bones: see how We bring them
together and clothe them with ﬂesh!’ When all became clear to him,
he said, ‘Now I know that God has power over everything.’
260And when Abraham said, ‘My Lord, show me how You give life
to the dead,’ He said, ‘Do you not believe, then?’ ‘Yes,’ said Abraham,‘but just to put my heart at rest.’ So God said, ‘Take four birds andtrain them to come back to you. Then place them on separate hill-tops,
a call them back, and they will come ﬂying to you: know that
God is all powerful and wise.’
261Those who spend their wealth in God’s cause are like grains of
corn that produce seven ears, each bearing a hundred grains. Godgives multiple increase to whoever He wishes: He is limitless and allknowing. 262Those who spend their wealth in God’s cause, and do not
follow their spending with reminders of their benevolence or hurtfulwords, will have their rewards with their Lord: no fear for them, norwill they grieve. 263A kind word and forgiveness is better than a
charitable deed followed by hurtful [words]: God is self-su ﬃcient,
forbearing. 264You who believe, do not cancel out your charitable
aMost of the classical commentators take the view that Abraham must have had to
cut up the birds ﬁrst if they were really to rise from the dead, rendering this phrase ‘then
place them separately on hilltops’. However, Abu Muslim thought the important partof the image was that it is as easy for souls to come back to the body as for the birds tocome back to Abraham (Razi). Cf. ‘To Him you shall return’, in many places, e.g. 2:245
and285.The Qur ᾿an 2:258 30deeds with reminders and hurtful words, like someone who spends
his wealth only to be seen by people, not believing in God and theLast Day. Such a person is like a rock with earth on it: heavy rainfalls and leaves it completely bare. Such people get no rewards fortheir works: God does not guide the disbelievers. 265But those who
spend their wealth in order to gain God’s approval, and as an a ﬃrm-
ation of their own faith, are like a garden on a hill: heavy rain falls
and it produces double its normal yield; even if no heavy rain falls, it
will still be watered by the dew. God sees all that you do. 266Would
any of you like to have a garden of palm trees and vines, graced withﬂowing streams and all kinds of produce, which, when you are
aﬄicted with old age and feeble o ﬀspring, is struck by a ﬁery whirl-
wind and burnt down? In this way God makes His messages clear toyou, so that you may re ﬂect on them.
267You who believe, give charitably from the good things you have
acquired and that We have produced for you from the earth. Do notgive away the bad things that you yourself would only accept withyour eyes closed: remember that God is self-su ﬃcient, worthy of all
praise. 268Satan threatens you with the prospect of poverty and
commands you to do foul deeds; God promises you His forgivenessand His abundance: God is limitless and all knowing, 269and He gives
wisdom to whoever He will. Whoever is given wisdom has truly beengiven much good, but only those with insight bear this in mind.270Whatever you may give, or vow to give, God knows it well, and
those who do wrong will have no one to help them. 271If you give
charity openly, it is good, but if you keep it secret and give to theneedy in private, that is better for you, and it will atone for some ofyour bad deeds: God is well aware of all that you do. 272It is not for
you [Prophet] to guide them; it is God who guides whoever He will.Whatever charity you give bene ﬁts your own soul, provided you do it
for the sake of God: whatever you give will be repaid to you in full,and you will not be wronged. 273[Give] to those needy who are
wholly occupied in God’s way and cannot travel in the land [fortrade]. The unknowing might think them rich because of their self-
restraint, but you will recognize them by their characteristic of not
begging persistently. God is well aware of any good you give.
274Those who give, out of their own possessions, by night and by
day, in private and in public, will have their reward with their Lord:no fear for them, nor will they grieve. 275But those who take usuryThe Cow
31 2:275will rise up on the Day of Resurrection like someone tormented by
Satan’s touch. That is because they say, ‘Trade and usury are thesame,’ 276but God has allowed trade and forbidden usury. Whoever,
on receiving God’s warning, stops taking usury may keep his pastgains– – God will be his judge– – but whoever goes back to usury will
be an inhabitant of the Fire, there to remain. God blights usury, butblesses charitable deeds with multiple increase: He does not love theungrateful sinner. 277Those who believe, do good deeds, keep up the
prayer, and pay the prescribed alms will have their reward with theirLord: no fear for them, nor will they grieve. 278You who believe,
beware of God: give up any outstanding dues from usury, if you aretrue believers. 279If you do not, then be warned of war from God and
His Messenger. You shall have your capital if you repent, and with-out su ﬀering loss or causing others to su ﬀer loss. 280If the debtor is
in di ﬃculty, then delay things until matters become easier for him;
still, if you were to write it o ﬀ as an act of charity, that would be
better for you, if only you knew. 281Beware of a Day when you will be
returned to God: every soul will be paid in full for what it hasearned, and no one will be wronged.
282You who believe, when you contract a debt for a stated term,
put it down in writing: have a scribe write it down justly betweenyou. No scribe should refuse to write: let him write as God hastaught him, let the debtor dictate, and let him fear God, his Lord,and not diminish [the debt] at all. If the debtor is feeble-minded,weak, or unable to dictate, then let his guardian dictate justly. Call intwo men as witnesses. If two men are not there, then call one manand two women out of those you approve as witnesses, so that if oneof the two women should forget
a the other can remind her. Let the
witnesses not refuse when they are summoned. Do not disdain to
write the debt down, be it small or large, along with the time it fallsdue: this way is more equitable in God’s eyes, more reliable as testi-
mony, and more likely to prevent doubts arising between you. But if
the merchandise is there and you hand it over, there is no blame onyou if you do not write it down. Have witnesses present wheneveryou trade with one another, and let no harm be done to either scribeor witness, for if you did cause them harm, it would be a crime onyour part. Be mindful of God, and He will teach you: He has full
aA classical meaning of d˙alla.The Qur ᾿an 2:276 32knowledge of everything. 283If you are on a journey, and cannot ﬁnd a
scribe, something should be handed over as security, but if youdecide to trust one another, then let the one who is trusted ful ﬁl his
trust; let him be mindful of God, his Lord. Do not conceal evidence:anyone who does so has a sinful heart, and God is fully aware ofeverything you do. 284Whatever is in the heavens and in the earth
belongs to God and, whether you reveal or conceal your thoughts,
God will call you to account for them. He will forgive whoever He
will and punish whoever He will: He has power over all things.
285The Messenger believes in what has been sent down to him
from his Lord, as do the faithful. They all believe in God, His angels,His scriptures, and His messengers. ‘We make no distinctionbetween any of His messengers,’ they say, ‘We hear and obey. Grantus Your forgiveness, our Lord. To You we all return!’– –286God does
not burden any soul with more than it can bear: each gains whatevergood it has done, and su ﬀers its bad– – ‘ Lord, do not take us to task if
we forget or make mistakes. Lord, do not burden us as You burdenedthose before us. Lord, do not burden us with more than we havestrength to bear. Pardon us, forgive us, and have mercy on us. Youare our Protector, so help us against the disbelievers.’The Cow
33 2:2863. THE FAMILY OF ῾IMRAN
A Medinan sura which takes its title from the family of ῾Imran mentioned in
verse 33. It begins by emphasizing that the Qur ᾿an con ﬁrms the earlier scrip-
tures and goes on to say later that the central tenet of faith is devotion to God(verses 19–20). The story of Zachariah, Mary, and Jesus is given in verses
35–64 and the fact that Jesus was unfathered, just as Adam was created
without a father, is accentuated. Aspects of the battles of Badr and Uhud aredescribed, especially the latter, where the Muslims disobeyed the Prophet andwere defeated. The sura ﬁrst documents the tension that arose between the
Muslims and certain of the Jews and Christians (verses 65–85 and 98–101),
then closes by emphasizing the unity of faith and conduct between the Muslimsand some of these People of the Book, explaining that these will have their
reward from God (verse 199).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Alif Lam Mima
2God: there is no god but Him, the Ever Living, the Ever Watchful.
3Step by step, He has sent the Scripture down to you [Prophet] with
the Truth, con ﬁrming what went before: He sent down the Torah
and the Gospel 4earlier as a guide for people and He has sent down
the distinction [between right and wrong].b Those who deny God’s
revelations will su ﬀer severe torment: God is almighty and capable
of retribution. 5Nothing on earth or in heaven is hidden from God:
6it is He who shapes you all in the womb as He pleases. There is no
God but Him, the Mighty, the Wise: 7it is He who has sent this
Scripture down to you [Prophet]. Some of its verses are de ﬁnite in
meaning– – these are the cornerstonec of the Scripture– – and others
are ambiguous. The perverse at heart eagerly pursue the ambiguitiesin their attempt to make trouble and to pin down a speci ﬁc mean-
ing of their own: only God knows the true meaning. Those ﬁrmly
grounded in knowledge say, ‘We believe in it: it is all from ourLord’– – only those with real perception will take heed– – 8‘Our Lord,
aSee note to 2:1.
bSee also 5:48;25:1.
cLiterally ‘the mother’.do not let our hearts deviate after You have guided us. Grant us Your
mercy: You are the Ever Giving. 9Our Lord, You will gather all
people on the Day of which there is no doubt:a God never breaks
His promise.’
10Neither their possessions nor their children will be any use to
the disbelievers against God. The disbelievers will be fuel for theFire, 11just as Pharaoh’s people and their predecessors denied Our
revelations, and God punished them for their sins: God is severe inpunishing. 12[Prophet], say to the disbelievers, ‘You will be defeated
and driven together into Hell, a foul resting place. 13You have already
seen a sign in the two armies that met in battle, one ﬁghting for
God’s cause and the other made up of disbelievers. With their owneyes [the former] saw [the latter] to be twice their number,
b but God
helps whoever He will. There truly is a lesson in this for all with eyesto see.’
14The love of desirable things is made alluring for men– – women,
children, gold and silver treasures piled up high, horses with ﬁne
markings, livestock, and farmland– – these may be the joys of this life,
but God has the best place to return to. 15[Prophet], say, ‘Would you
like me to tell you of things that are better than all of these? TheirLord will give those who are mindful of God Gardens graced withﬂowing streams, where they will stay with pure spouses and God’s
good pleasure– – God is fully aware of His servants– –16those who say,
“Our Lord, we believe, so forgive us our sins and protect us fromsuﬀering in the Fire,” 17those who are steadfast, truthful, truly devout,
who give [in God’s cause] and pray before dawn for forgiveness.’
18God bears witness that there is no god but Him, as do the angels
and those who have knowledge. He upholds justice. There is nogod but Him, the Almighty, the All Wise. 19True Religion, in God’s
eyes, is islam : [devotion to Him alone].
c Those who were given the
Scripture disagreed out of rivalry, only after they had been givenknowledge– – if anyone denies God’s revelations, God is swift to take
account– –20if they argue with you [Prophet], say, ‘I have devoted
myself
d to God alone and so have my followers.’ Ask those who were
aAnd on the day itself there will no longer be any doubt (see 102:3–8).
bThis is an allusion to the Battle of Badr, where the Muslim army was vastly out-
numbered but still victorious (see 8:43–4).
cSee note to 2:128 above.
dLiterally ‘submitted my face’.3:20 The Family of ῾Imran 35given the Scripture, as well as those without one, ‘Do you too devote
yourselves to Him alone?’ If they do, they will be guided, but if theyturn away, your only duty is to convey the message. God is aware ofHis servants.
21Give news of agonizing torment to those who ignore God’s
revelations, who unjusti ﬁably kill prophets, who kill those who
command that justice is done: 22the deeds of such people will
come to nothing in this world and in the next and no one will helpthem. 23Have you considered those who were given a share of the
Scripture? When they are asked to accept judgement from God’s
Scripture, some of them turn their backs and walk away, all becausethey declare, 24‘The Fire will only touch us for a limited number of
days.’ The lies they have invented have led them astray in their own
religion. 25How will they fare when We gather them together for a
Day of which there is no doubt, when every soul will be paid in fullfor what it has done, and they will not be wronged?
26Say, ‘God, holder of all control,
a You give control to whoever
You will and remove it from whoever You will; You elevate whoeverYou will and humble whoever You will. All that is good lies in Your
hand: You have power over everything. 27You merge night into day
and day into night; You bring the living out of the dead and the deadout of the living; You provide limitlessly for whoever You will.’
28The believers should not make the disbelievers their allies
rather than other believers– – anyone who does such a thing will
isolate himself completely from God– – except when you need to
protect yourselves from them. God warns you to beware of Him:the Final Return is to God. 29Say [Prophet], ‘God knows every-
thing that is in your hearts, whether you conceal or reveal it; Heknows everything in the heavens and earth; God has power over allthings.’ 30On the Day when every soul ﬁnds all the good it has done
present before it, it will wish all the bad it has done to be far, faraway. God warns you to beware of Him, but God is compassionate
towards His servants. 31Say, ‘If you love God, follow me, and God
will love you and forgive you your sins; God is most forgiving, mostmerciful.’ 32Say, ‘Obey God and the Messenger,’ but if they turn
away, [know that] God does not love those who ignore [Hiscommands].
aOr sovereignty.3:21 The Qur ᾿an 3633God chose Adam, Noah, Abraham’s family,a and the family of
῾Imran, over all other people, 34in one line of descent– – God hears
and knows all. 35 ῾Imran’s wife said, ‘Lord, I have dedicated what is
growing in my womb entirely to You; so accept this from me. You arethe One who hears and knows all,’ 36but when she gave birth, she
said, ‘My Lord! I have given birth to a girl’– – God knew best what
she had given birth to: the male is not like the female– – ‘ I name her
Mary and I commend her and her o ﬀspring to Your protection from
the rejected Satan.’ 37Her Lord graciously accepted her and made
her grow in goodness, and entrusted her to the charge of Zachariah.
Whenever Zachariah went in to see her in her sanctuary, he found
her supplied with provisions. He said, ‘Mary, how is it you have
these provisions?’ and she said, ‘They are from God: God provides
limitlessly for whoever He will.’ 38There and then Zachariah prayed
to his Lord, saying, ‘Lord, from Your grace grant me virtuous o ﬀ-
spring: You hear every prayer.’ 39The angels called out to him, while
he stood praying in the sanctuary, ‘God gives you news of John,conﬁrming a Word from God.
b He will be noble and chaste, a
prophet, one of the righteous.’ 40He said, ‘My Lord, how can I have a
son when I am so old and my wife is barren?’ [An angel] said, ‘It willbe so: God does whatever He will.’ 41He said, ‘My Lord, give me a
sign.’ ‘Your sign,’ [the angel] said, ‘is that you will not communicatewith anyone for three days, except by gestures. Remember your Lordoften; celebrate His glory in the evening and at dawn.’
42The angels said to Mary: ‘Mary, God has chosen you and made
you pure: He has truly chosen you above all women. 43Mary, be
devout to your Lord, prostrate yourself in worship, bow down withthose who pray.’ 44This is an account of things beyond your know-
ledge that We reveal to you [Muhammad]: you were not presentamong them when they
c cast lots to see which of them should take
charge of Mary, you were not present with them when they argued[about her].
45The angels said, ‘Mary, God gives you news of a Word from
Him, whose name will be the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, who will
aThis means family in the widest sense of the term.
bVerse 45 below: Jesus was given the epithet ‘a Word from God’. One explanation is that
this was because it was God’s command that brought him into being, rather than theintervention of a human father (Razi).
cThe priests.3:45 The Family of ῾Imran 37be held in honour in this world and the next, who will be one of
those brought near to God. 46He will speak to people in his infancya
and in his adulthood. He will be one of the righteous.’ 47She said,
‘My Lord, how can I have a son when no man has touched me?’[The angel] said, ‘This is how God creates what He will: when Hehas ordained something, He only says, “Be”, and it is. 48He will
teach him the Scripture and wisdom, the Torah and the Gospel,49He will send him as a messenger to the Children of Israel: “I have
come to you with a sign from your Lord: I will make the shape of abird for you out of clay, then breathe into it and, with God’s permis-sion, it will become a real bird; I will heal the blind and the leper, andbring the dead back to life with God’s permission; I will tell youwhat you may eat and what you may store up in your houses.
b There
truly is a sign for you in this, if you are believers. 50I have come to
conﬁrm the truth of the Torah which preceded me, and to make
some things lawful to you which used to be forbidden. I have come toyou with a sign from your Lord. Be mindful of God, obey me: 51God
is my Lord and your Lord, so serve Him– – that is a straight path.”’
52When Jesus realized they [still] did not believe, he said, ‘Who
will help me in God’s cause?’ The disciples said, ‘We will be God’shelpers; we believe in God– – witness our devotion to Him. 53Lord,
we believe in what You have revealed and we follow the messenger:
record us among those who bear witness [to the Truth].’ 54The
[disbelievers] schemed but God also schemed; God is the Best ofSchemers.
55God said, ‘Jesus, I will take you back and raise you up to Me: I
will purify you of the disbelievers. To the Day of Resurrection I willmake those who follow you superior to those who disbelieved. Thenyou will all return to Me and I will judge between you regardingyour di ﬀerences. 56I will make the disbelievers su ﬀer severely in this
world and the next; no one will help them.’ 57God will pay those who
believe and do good deeds their reward in full; God does not loveevildoers.
58We relate to you [Muhammad] this revelation, a decisive state-
ment. 59 In God’s eyes Jesus is just like Adam: He created him from
aCf. 19:29–30. The word mahd  means a place smoothed out for a small child to
sleep in. It is not a piece of furniture like a cradle.
bAnother possible translation is ‘to tell you what you eat and what you stor e... ’ .3:46 The Qur ᾿an 38dust, said to him, ‘Be’, and he was. 60This is the truth from your
Lord, so do not be one of those who doubt. 61If anyone disputes this
with you now that you have been given this knowledge, say, ‘Come,let us gather our sons and your sons, our women and your women,ourselves and yourselves, and let us pray earnestly and invoke God’srejection on those of us who are lying. 62This is the truth of the
matter: there is no god but God; God is the Exalted, the Decider.’
a
63If they turn away, [know that] God is well aware of anyone who
causes corruption.b64Say, ‘People of the Book, let us arrive at a
statement that is common to us all: we worship God alone, weascribe no partner to Him, and none of us takes others beside God as
lords.’ If they turn away, say, ‘Witness our devotion to Him.’
65People of the Book, why do you argue about Abraham when the
Torah and the Gospels were not revealed until after his time? Do younot understand? 66You argue about some things of which you have
some knowledge, but why do you argue about things of which youknow nothing? God knows and you do not. 67Abraham was neither a
Jew nor a Christian. He was upright and devoted to God, never anidolater, 68and the people who are closest to him are those who truly
follow his ways, this Prophet, and [true] believers– – God is close to
[true] believers.
69Some of the People of the Book would dearly love to lead you
[believers] astray, but they only lead themselves astray, though theydo not realize it. 70People of the Book, why do you deny God’s
revelations when you can see they are true? 71People of the Book,
why do you mix truth with falsehood? Why do you hide the truthwhen you recognize it? 72Some of the People of the Book say, ‘At the
beginning of the day, believe in what has been revealed to these
believers [the Muslims], then at the end of the day reject it, so thatthey too may turn back, 73but do not sincerely believe in anyone
unless he follows your own religion’– – [Prophet], tell them, ‘True
guidance is the guidance of God’– – [they say], ‘Do not believe that
anyone else could be given a revelation similar to what you weregiven, or that they could use it to argue against you in your Lord’spresence.’ [Prophet], tell them, ‘All grace is in God’s hands: Hegrants it to whoever He will– – He is all embracing, all knowing– –
aThis translation of the term hakim  is suggested by Razi.
bCorruption of beliefs and all that follows from that.3:73 The Family of ῾Imran 3974and He singles out for His mercy whoever He will. His grace is
inﬁnite.’
75There are People of the Book who, if you [Prophet] entrust
them with a heap of gold, will return it to you intact, but there areothers of them who, if you entrust them with a single dinar, will notreturn it to you unless you keep standing over them, because theysay, ‘We are under no obligation towards the gentiles.’ They tell a lieagainst God and they know it. 76No indeed! God loves those who
keep their pledges and are mindful of Him, 77but those who sell out
God’s covenant and their own oaths for a small price will have no
share in the life to come. God will neither speak to them nor look atthem on the Day of Resurrection– – He will not cleanse them [of
their sins]– – agonizing torment awaits them. 78There are some who
twist the Scripture with their tongues to make you [people] thinkthat what they say is part of the Scripture when it is not; they say itis from God when it is not; they attribute lies to God and theyknow it.
79No person to whom God had given the Scripture, wisdom, and
prophethood would ever say to people, ‘Be my servants, not God’s.’[He would say], ‘You should be devoted to God because you havetaught the Scripture and studied it closely.’ 80He would never
command you to take angels and prophets as lords. How could
he command you to be disbelievers after you had devoted yourselvesto God?
81God took a pledge from the prophets, saying, ‘If, after I have
bestowed Scripture and wisdom upon you, a messenger comes con-ﬁrming what you have been given, you must believe in him and
support him. Do you a ﬃrm this and accept My pledge as binding on
you?’ They said, ‘We do.’ He said, ‘Then bear witness and I too willbear witness.’ 82Those who turn away after this are the ones who
break pledges. 83Do they seek anything other than submission to
God? Everyone in the heavens and earth submits to Him, willinglyor unwillingly; they will all be returned to Him.
84Say [Muhammad], ‘We [Muslims] believe in God and in what
has been sent down to us and to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and
the Tribes. We believe in what has been given to Moses, Jesus,and the prophets from their Lord. We do not make a distinction
between any of the [prophets]. It is to Him that we devote ourselves.’85If anyone seeks a religion other than [ islam ] complete devotion to3:74 The Qur ᾿an 40God, it will not be accepted from him: he will be one of the losers in
the Hereafter. 86Why would God guide people who deny the truth,
after they have believed and acknowledged that the Messenger istrue, and after they have been shown clear proof? God does notguide evildoers: 87such people will be rewarded with rejection by
God, by the angels, by all people, 88and so they will remain, with
no relief or respite for their su ﬀering. 89Not so those who afterwards
repent and mend their ways– – God is most forgiving and merciful– –
90[although] the repentance of those who, having believed, then
increase in their disbelief, will not be accepted. They are the ones
who have gone [far] astray: 91those who disbelieve and die dis-
believers will not be saved even if they o ﬀer enough gold to ﬁll the
entire earth. Agonizing torment is in store for them, and there will
be no one to help them. 92None of you [believers] will attain true
piety unless you give out of what you cherish: whatever you give,God knows about it very well.
93Except for what Israel made unlawful for himself, all food was
lawful to the Children of Israel before the Torah was revealed.
a Say,
‘Bring the Torah and read out [the relevant passage] if you are tellingthe truth. 94Those who persist in making up lies and attributing
them to God after this are the wrongdoers.’ 95[Prophet], say, ‘God
speaks the truth, so follow Abraham’s religion: he had true faith andhe was never an idolater.’ 96The ﬁrst House [of worship] to be estab-
lished for people was the one at Mecca.
b It is a blessed place; a source
of guidance for all people; 97there are clear signs in it; it is the place
where Abraham stood to pray; whoever enters it is safe. Pilgrimageto the House is a duty owed to God by people who are able toundertake it. Those who reject this [should know that] God has noneed of anyone. 98Say, ‘People of the Book, why do you reject God’s
revelations? God witnesses everything you do.’ 99Say, ‘People of the
Book, why do you turn the believers away from God’s path and tryto make it crooked, when you yourselves [should be] witnesses to the[truth]? God is not heedless of anything you do.’
aThe commentators explain that Israel/Jacob (Abraham’s grandson) vowed to give
up camel ﬂesh and camel milk if he were relieved of his sciatica, and the Jews in Medina
argued with Muhammad: ‘You claim to be following the religion of Abraham. If thiswere so you would not be eating camel meat and drinking its milk, as these are forbiddenin Abraham’s religion.’ This verse answers this argument (Razi).
bThe original reads Bakka , which was an old name for Mecca.3:99 The Family of ῾Imran 41100You who believe, some of those who were given the Scripture
would turn you into disbelievers if you were to yield to them.101How can you disbelieve when God’s revelations are being recited
to you and His Messenger is living among you? Whoever holds fastto God will be guided to the straight path. 102You who believe, be
mindful of God, as is His due, and make sure you devote yourselvesto Him, to your dying moment. 103Hold fast to God’s rope all
together; do not split into factions. Remember God’s favour to you:you were enemies and then He brought your hearts together and
you became brothers by His grace; you were about to fall into a pit
of Fire and He saved you from it– – in this way God makes His
revelations clear to you so that you may be rightly guided. 104Be
a a
community that calls for what is good, urges what is right, andforbids what is wrong: those who do this are the successful ones.
105Do not be like those who, after they have been given clear revela-
tion, split into factions and fall into disputes: a terrible punishmentawaits such people. 106On the Day when some faces brighten and
others darken, it will be said to those with darkened faces, ‘Howcould you reject your faith after believing? Taste the torment fordoing so,’ 107but those with brightened faces will be in God’s grace,
there to remain. 108These are God’s revelations: We recite them to
you [Prophet] with the Truth. God does not will injustice for Hiscreatures. 109Everything in the heavens and earth belongs to God; it
is to Him that all things return.
110[Believers], you are the best community singled out for people:
you order what is right, forbid what is wrong, and believe in God. Ifthe People of the Book had also believed, it would have been betterfor them. For although some of them do believe, most of them arelawbreakers– –111they will not do you much harm: even if they come
out to ﬁght you, they will soon turn tail; they will get no help– –
112and, unless they hold fast to a lifeline from God and from man-
kind, they are overshadowed by vulnerability wherever they arefound. They have drawn God’s wrath upon themselves. They are
overshadowed by weakness, too, because they have persistently dis-
believed in God’s revelation and killed prophets without any right,all because of their disobedience and boundless transgression. 113But
they are not all alike. There are some among the People of the Book
aRazi explains that the preposition min in the Arabic, usually translated as ‘let there
beamong  you’, here applies to the whole community, not just part of it.3:100 The Qur ᾿an 42who are upright, who recite God’s revelations during the night, who
bow down in worship, 114who believe in God and the Last Day, who
order what is right and forbid what is wrong, who are quick to dogood deeds. These people are among the righteous 115and they will
not be denied [the reward] for whatever good deeds they do: Godknows exactly who is conscious of Him.
116As for those who disbelieve, neither their possessions nor their
children will help them against God– – they will be companions in
the Fire, there to remain– –117and whatever they give away in this life
will be nulli ﬁed: a frosty wind strikes and destroys the harvest of
people who have wronged themselves. It was not God who wrongedthem; they wronged themselves.
118You who believe, do not take for your intimates such outsiders
as spare no e ﬀort to ruin you and want to see you su ﬀer: their hatred
is evident from their mouths, but what their hearts conceal is farworse. We have made Our revelations clear for you; will you not useyour reason? 119This is how it is: here you are, you love them, but
they do not love you; you believe in all the Scriptures and when theymeet you, they say, ‘We believe,’ but when they are alone, they bitetheir ﬁngertips in rage at you. [Prophet], say, ‘Die of rage [if you
wish]!’ God knows exactly what is in everyone’s hearts. 120They
grieve at any good that befalls you [believers] and rejoice at your
misfortunes. But if you are steadfast and conscious of God, theirscheming will not harm you in the least: God encircles everythingthey do.
121[Prophet], remember when you left your home at dawn to
assign battle positions to the believers: God hears and knows every-thing. 122Remember when two groups of you were about to lose heart
and God protected them– – let the believers put their trust in God– –
123God helped you at Badr when you were very weak. Be mindful of
God, so that you may be grateful. 124Remember when you said to the
believers, ‘Will you be satis ﬁed if your Lord reinforces you by send-
ing down three thousand angels? 125Well, if you are steadfast and
mindful of God, your Lord will reinforce you with ﬁve thousand
swooping angels if the enemy should suddenly attack you!’ and God
arranged it so, 126as a message of hope for you [believers] to put your
hearts at rest– – help comes only from God, the Mighty, the Wise– –
127and in order to cut o ﬀ the ﬂanks of the disbelievers’ army and
frustrate them, to make them withdraw in total defeat. 128Whether3:128 The Family of ῾Imran 43God relents towards them or punishes them is not for you [Prophet]
to decide: they are wrongdoers. 129Everything in the heavens and
earth belongs to God. He forgives whoever He will and punisheswhoever He will: God is most forgiving and merciful.
130You who believe, do not consume usurious interest, doubled
and redoubled. Be mindful of God so that you may prosper– –
131beware of the Fire prepared for those who ignore [Him]– –132and
obey God and the Prophet so that you may be given mercy. 133Hurry
towards your Lord’s forgiveness and a Garden as wide as the
heavens and earth prepared for the righteous, 134who give, both in
prosperity and adversity, who restrain their anger and pardonpeople– – God loves those who do good– –135those who remember
God and implore forgiveness for their sins if they do something
shameful or wrong themselves– – who forgives sins but God?– – and
who never knowingly persist in doing wrong. 136The reward for such
people is forgiveness from their Lord, and Gardens graced withﬂowing streams, where they will remain. How excellent is the reward
of those who labour!
137God’s ways have operated before your time: travel through the
land, and see what was the end of those who disbelieved. 138This is a
clear lesson to people, and guidance and teaching for those who are
mindful of God. 139Do not lose heart or despair– – if you are true
believers you have the upper hand– –140if you have su ﬀered a blow,
they too have su ﬀered one like it.
a We deal out such days among
people in turn, for God to ﬁnd out who truly believes, for Him to
choose martyrsb from among you– – God does not love evildoers– –
141for Him to cleanse those who believe and for Him to destroy the
disbelievers. 142Did you think you would enter the Garden without
God ﬁrst proving which of you would struggle for His cause and
remain steadfast? 143Before you encountered death, you were hoping
for it. Well, now you have seen it with your own eyes.
144Muhammad is only a messenger before whom many messengers
aThis part of the sura refers to the Battle of Uhud, where the Muslims were
defeated, having disobeyed the Prophet’s orders.
bThe noun shahid  is much more complex than the term ‘martyr’ chosen to render it
in this context. The root sh–h–d  conveys ‘to witness, to be present, to attend’, but also
‘to testify’ or ‘to give evidence’. Thus the ‘martyrs’ here are chosen by God to witnessHim in heaven, are given the opportunity to give evidence of the depth of their faithby sacri ﬁcing their worldly lives, and will testify with the prophets on the Day of
Judgement.3:129 The Qur ᾿an 44have been and gone. If he died or was killed,a would you revert to
your old ways? If anyone did so, he would not harm God in the least.God will reward the grateful. 145No soul may die except with God’s
permission at a predestined time. If anyone strives for the rewards ofthis world, We will give him some of them. If anyone strives for therewards of the Hereafter, We will give him some of them: We willreward the grateful. 146Many prophets have fought, with large bands
of godly men alongside them who, in the face of their su ﬀerings for
God’s cause, did not lose heart or weaken or surrender: God loves
those who are steadfast. 147All they said was, ‘Our Lord, forgive us
our sins and our excesses. Make our feet ﬁrm, and give us help
against the disbelievers,’ 148and so God gave them both the rewards
of this world and the excellent rewards of the Hereafter: God loves
those who do good.
149You who believe, if you obey the disbelievers, they will make
you revert to your old ways and you will turn into losers. 150No
indeed! It is God who is your protector: He is the best of helpers.151We will strike panic into the disbelievers’ hearts because they
attribute partners to God although He has sent no authority for this:their shelter will be the Fire– – how miserable is the home of the
evildoers! 152God ful ﬁlled His promise to you: you were routing
them, with His permission, but then you faltered, disputed the
order, and disobeyed, once He had brought you within sight of yourgoal
b–– some of you desire the gains of this world and others desire
the world to come– – and then He prevented you from [defeating]
them as a punishment. He has now forgiven you: God is most gra-cious to the believers. 153You ﬂed without looking back while the
Messenger was calling out to you from behind, and God rewardedyou with sorrow for sorrow. [He has now forgiven you] so that youmay not grieve for what you missed or for what happened to you.God is well aware of everything you do. 154After sorrow, He caused
calm to descend upon you, a sleep that overtook some of you.
Another group, caring only for themselves, entertained false
thoughts about God, thoughts more appropriate to pagan ignorance,and said, ‘Do we get a say in any of this?’ [Prophet], tell them,
aIn the Battle of Uhud, it was rumoured that Muhammad had been killed.
bThe archers disobeyed the Prophet’s order to remain in their positions until the
end. They thought the Muslims had won and dashed to get the booty. This allowed theirenemies to regroup and attack, so winning the battle.3:154 The Family of ῾Imran 45‘Everything to do with this a ﬀair is in God’s hands.’ They conceal in
their hearts things they will not reveal to you. They say, ‘If we hadhad our say in this, none of us would have been killed here.’ Tellthem, ‘Even if you had resolved to stay at home, those who weredestined to be killed would still have gone out to meet their deaths.’God did this in order to test everything within you and in order toprove what is in your hearts. God knows your innermost thoughtsvery well. 155As for those of you who turned away on the day the two
armies met in battle, it was Satan who caused them to slip, through
some of their actions. God has now pardoned them: God is most
forgiving and forbearing.
156You who believe, do not be like those who disbelieved and said
of their brothers who went out on a journey or a raid, ‘If only they
had stayed with us they would not have died or been killed,’ for Godwill make such thoughts a source of anguish in their hearts. It is Godwho gives life and death; God sees everything you do. 157Whether
you are killed for God’s cause or die, God’s forgiveness and mercyare better than anything people amass. 158Whether you die or are
killed, it is to God that you will be gathered.
159By an act of mercy from God, you [Prophet] were gentle in
your dealings with them– – had you been harsh, or hard-hearted, they
would have dispersed and left you– – so pardon them and ask forgive-
ness for them. Consult with them about matters, then, when youhave decided on a course of action, put your trust in God: God lovesthose who put their trust in Him. 160If God helps you [believers], no
one can overcome you; if He forsakes you, who else can help you?Believers should put their trust in God.
161It is inconceivable that a prophet would ever dishonestly take
something from the battle gains. Anyone who does so will carry itwith him on the Day of Resurrection, when each soul will be fullyrepaid for what it has done: no one will be wronged. 162Can the man
who pursues God’s good pleasure be like the man who has broughtGod’s wrath upon himself and whose home will be Hell– – a foul
destination? 163They are in a di ﬀerent class in God’s eyes; God sees
exactly what they do.
164God has been truly gracious to the believers in sending them a
Messenger from among their own, to recite His revelations to them,to make them grow in purity, and to teach them the Scripture andwisdom– – before that they were clearly astray. 165Why do you3:155 The Qur ᾿an 46[believers] say, when a calamity befalls you, even after you have
inﬂicted twice as much damage [on your enemy], ‘How did this
happen?’? [Prophet], say, ‘You brought it upon yourselves.’ God haspower over everything: 166what befell you on the day the two armies
met in battle happened with God’s permission and in order for Himto see who were the true believers and who were the hypocrites who,167when it was said to them, ‘Come, ﬁght for God’s cause, or at least
defend yourselves,’ answered, ‘We would follow you if we knew therewas going to be ﬁghting.’ On that day they were closer to disbelief
than belief. They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts:
God knows exactly what they conceal.
168As for those who stayed behind, and said of their brothers, ‘If
only they had listened to us, they would not have been killed,’ tell them
[Prophet], ‘Ward o ﬀ death from yourselves, if what you say is true.’
169[Prophet], do not think of those who have been killed in God’s way
as dead. They are alive with their Lord, well provided for, 170happy
with what God has given them of His favour; rejoicing that for thosethey have left behind who have yet to join them there is no fear, nor willthey grieve; 171[rejoicing] in God’s blessing and favour, and that God
will not let the reward of the believers be lost. 172Those who responded
to God and the Messenger after su ﬀering defeat, who do good and
remain conscious of God, will have a great reward. 173Those whose
faith only increased when people said, ‘Fear your enemy: they haveamassed a great army against you,’ and who replied, ‘God is enoughfor us: He is the best protector,’ 174returned with grace and bounty
from God; no harm befell them. They pursued God’s good pleas-ure. God’s favour is great indeed. 175It is Satan who urges you to fear
his followers; do not fear them, but fear Me, if you are true believers.
176[Prophet], do not be grieved by those who are quick to dis-
believe. They will not harm God in the least; it is God’s will thatthey will have no share in the Hereafter– – a terrible torment awaits
them. 177Those who sell their faith for disbelief will not harm God in
any way; agonizing torment awaits them. 178The disbelievers should
not think that it is better for them that We give them more time:
when We give them more time they become more sinful– – a shameful
torment awaits them. 179Nor was it God’s aim to leave you as you
were, with no separation between the bad and the good.
a God
aWith hypocrites mixing with them (Razi). See verses 166–7.3:179 The Family of ῾Imran 47would not show you [people] what is hidden; God chooses as His
messengers whoever He will. So believe in God and His messengers:if you believe and stay mindful of God, you will have a great reward.180Those who are miserly with what God has granted them out of
His grace should not think that it is good for them; on the contrary,it is bad for them. Whatever they meanly withhold will be hungaround their necks on the Day of Resurrection. It is God who willinherit the heavens and earth: God is well aware of everythingyou do.
181God has certainly heard the words of those who sneer, ‘So God
is poor, while we are rich’.
a We shall record everything they say– –a s
well as their killing of prophets in de ﬁance of all that is right– – and
We shall say to them, ‘Taste the torment of the scorching ﬁre.
182That is on account of what you stored up for yourselves with your
own hands: God is never unjust to His servants.’ 183To those who
say, ‘God has commanded us not to believe in any messenger unlesshe brings us an o ﬀering that ﬁre [from heaven] consumes,’ say
[Prophet], ‘Messengers before me have come to you with clear signs,including the one you mention. If you are sincere, why did you kill
them?’ 184If they reject you, so have other messengers been rejected
before you, even though they came with clear evidence, books ofwisdom and enlightening scripture. 185Every soul will taste death
and you will be paid in full only on the Day of Resurrection. Who-ever is kept away from the Fire and admitted to the Garden will havetriumphed. The present world is only an illusory pleasure: 186you are
sure to be tested through your possessions and persons; you are sureto hear much that is hurtful from those who were given the Scripturebefore you and from those who associate others with God. If you aresteadfast and mindful of God, that is the best course.
187God took a pledge from those who were given the Scripture– –
‘Make it known to people; do not conceal it’– – but they tossed the
pledge over their shoulders, they bartered it for a small price: what abad bargain they made! 188Do not think [Prophet] that those who
exult in what they have done and seek praise for things they have notdone will escape the torment; agonizing torment awaits them.
189Control of the heavens and earth belongs to God; God has
aA retort to 2:245, which was often cited by the Prophet when asking for ﬁnancial
contributions to the cause.3:180 The Qur ᾿an 48power over everything. 190There truly are signs in the creation of the
heavens and earth, and in the alternation of night and day, for thosewith understanding, 191who remember God standing, sitting, and
lying down, who re ﬂect on the creation of the heavens and earth:
‘Our Lord! You have not created all this without purpose– – You are
far above that!– – so protect us from the torment of the Fire. 192Our
Lord! You will truly humiliate those You commit to the Fire. The
evildoers have no one to help them. 193Our Lord! We have heard
someone calling us to faith– – “ Believe in your Lord” – – and we have
believed. Our Lord! Forgive us our sins, wipe out our bad deeds, and
grant that we join the righteous when we die. 194Our Lord! Bestow
upon us all that You have promised us through Your messengers– –
do not humiliate us on the Day of Resurrection– – You never break
Your promise.’ 195Their Lord has answered them: ‘I will not allow
the deeds of any one of you to be lost, whether you are male orfemale, each is like the other [in rewards].
a I will certainly wipe out
the bad deeds of those who emigrated and were driven out of theirhomes, who su ﬀered harm for My cause, who fought and were
killed. I will certainly admit them to Gardens graced with ﬂowing
streams, as a reward from God: the best reward is with God.’
196[Prophet], do not be deceived by the disbelievers’ [lucrative]
trading to and fro in the land: 197this is only a brief enjoyment, after
which Hell will be their home– – a miserable resting place! 198But
those who were mindful of their Lord will have Gardens graced withﬂowing streams where they will stay as a reward from God. What
God has is best for those who are truly good.
199Some of the People of the Book believe in God, in what has
been sent down to you and in what was sent down to them: humblingthemselves before God, they would never sell God’s revelation for asmall price. These people will have their rewards with their Lord:God is swift in reckoning. 200You who believe, be steadfast, more
steadfast than others; be ready;
b always be mindful of God, so that
you may prosper.
aLiterally ‘you come from each other’, i.e. you are equal.
b‘For prayer’ or ‘to ward o ﬀ an attack’.3:200 The Family of ῾Imran 494. WOMEN
A Medinan sura which takes its title from the many references to women
throughout the sura (verses 3–4,127–30). It gives a number of instructions,
urging justice to children and orphans, and mentioning inheritance and mar-riage laws. Verses 5–12 of the sura give rulings on property and inheritance,
and so does the verse which concludes the sura. The sura also talks of the tensionsbetween the Muslim community in Medina and some of the People of the Book(verses 44,61), moving into a general discussion of war: it warns the Muslims
to be cautious and to defend the weak and helpless (verses 71–6). Another
similar theme is the intrigues of the hypocrites (verses 88–91,138–46).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1People, be mindful of your Lord, who created you from a single
soul, and from ita created its mate, and from the pair of them spread
countless men and women far and wide; be mindful of God, inwhose name you make requests of one another. Beware of severingthe ties of kinship:
b God is always watching over you. 2Give orphans
their property, do not replace [their] good things with bad, and donot consume their property with your own– – a great sin. 3If you
fear that you will not deal fairly with orphan girls,
c you may marry
whichever [other]d women seem good to you, two, three, or four. If
you fear that you cannot be equitable [to them], then marry only one,or your slave(s):
e that is more likely to make you avoid bias. 4Give
women their bridal gift upon marriage, though if they are happy togive up some of it for you, you may enjoy it with a clear conscience.
5Do not entrust your property to the feeble-minded. God has
made it a means of support for you: make provision for them from it,clothe them, and address them kindly. 6Test orphans until they reach
marriageable age; then, if you ﬁnd they have sound judgement, hand
a‘From the same essence’. Razi convincingly reached this conclusion based on
comparison with many instances when min anfusikum  is used in the Qur ᾿an.
bLiterally ‘the womb-relationships’, i.e. all those to whom you are related. This
expression occurs again in 47:22.
cIn pre-Islamic Arabia, some guardians of orphan girls used to marry them in order
to take their property (see 4:127).
dThis is a widely accepted interpretation.
e‘Literally ‘what your right hands possess’.over their property to them. Do not consume it hastily before they
come of age: if the guardian is well o ﬀ he should abstain from the
orphan’s property, and if he is poor he should use only what is fair.When you give them their property, call witnesses in; but God takesfull account of everything you do.
a
7Men shall have a share in what their parents and closest relatives
leave, and women shall have a share in what their parents and closestrelatives leave, whether the legacy be small or large: this is ordainedby God. 8If other relatives, orphans, or needy people are present at
the distribution, give them something too, and speak kindly to them.
9Let those who would fear for the future of their own helpless chil-
dren, if they were to die, show the same concern [for orphans]; let
them be mindful of God and speak out for justice. 10Those who
consume the property of orphans unjustly are actually swallowingﬁre into their own bellies: they will burn in the blazing Flame.
11Concerning your children, God commands you that a son
should have the equivalent share of two daughters. If there are onlydaughters, two or more should share two-thirds of the inheritance, ifone, she should have half. Parents inherit a sixth each if the deceasedleaves children; if he leaves no children and his parents are his soleheirs, his mother has a third, unless he has brothers, in which caseshe has a sixth. [In all cases, the distribution comes] after payment ofany bequests or debts. You cannot know which of your parents oryour children is more bene ﬁcial to you: this is a law from God, and
He is all knowing, all wise. 12You inherit half of what your wives
leave, if they have no children; if they have children, you inherit aquarter. [In all cases, the distribution comes] after payment of anybequests or debts. If you have no children, your wives’ share is aquarter; if you have children, your wives get an eighth. [In all cases,the distribution comes] after payment of any bequests or debts. If aman or a woman dies leaving no children or parents,
b but a single
brother or sister, he or she should take one-sixth of the inheritance;if there are more siblings, they share one-third between them. [In allcases, the distribution comes] after payment of any bequests ordebts, with no harm done to anyone: this is a commandment fromGod: God is all knowing and benign to all. 13These are the bounds
akaﬀa bi here is used idiomatically.
bThis is the most generally accepted meaning of the Arabic word kalala . There are
many others.Women 51 4:13set by God: God will admit those who obey Him and His Messenger
to Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams, and there they will stay– –
that is the supreme triumph! 14But those who disobey God and His
Messenger and overstep His limits will be consigned by God to theFire, and there they will stay– – a humiliating torment awaits them!
15If any of your women commit a lewd act, call four witnesses from
among you, then, if they testify to their guilt, keep the women at homeuntil death comes to them or until God shows them another way.
a
16If two men commit a lewd act, punish them both; if they repent and
mend their ways, leave them alone– – God is always ready to accept
repentance, He is full of mercy. 17But God only undertakes to accept
repentance from those who do evil out of ignorance and soon after-wards repent: these are the ones God will forgive, He is all knowing,all wise. 18It is not true repentance when people continue to do evil
until death confronts them and then say, ‘Now I repent,’ nor whenthey die de ﬁant: We have prepared a painful torment for these.
19You who believe, it is not lawful for you to inherit women against
their will,
b nor should you treat your wives harshly, hoping to take
back some of the bride-gift you gave them, unless they are guilty of
something clearly outrageous. Live with them in accordance withwhat is fair and kind: if you dislike them, it may well be that you
dislike something in which God has put much good. 20If you wish to
replace one wife with another, do not take any of her bride-gift back,even if you have given her a great amount of gold. 21How could you
take it when this is unjust and a blatant sin? How could you take it
when you have lain with each other and they have taken a solemnpledge from you?
22Do not marry women that your fathers married– – with the
exception of what is past– – this is indeed a shameful thing to do,
loathsome and leading to evil. 23You are forbidden to take as wives
your mothers, daughters, sisters, paternal and maternal aunts, thedaughters of brothers and daughters of sisters, your milk-mothersand milk-sisters,
c your wives’ mothers, the stepdaughters in your
aThrough another regulation, or marriage, or any other way. See also end of 65:2,
which uses nearly identical words.
bIn pre-Islamic Arabia, if a man died leaving a widow, her stepson or another man of
his family could inherit her.
cIslam regards women who breastfeed other people’s infants as their ‘milk-
mothers’, not merely ‘wet nurses’.The Qur ᾿an 4:14 52care–– those born of women with whom you have consummated
marriage, if you have not consummated the marriage, then you willnot be blamed– – wives of your begotten sons, two sisters simul-
taneously– – with the exception of what is past: God is most forgiving
and merciful– –24women already married, other than your slaves.
a
God has ordained all this for you. Other women are lawful to you, so
long as you seek them in marriage, with gifts from your property,looking for wedlock rather than fornication. If you wish to enjoywomen through marriage, give them their bride-gift– – this is obliga-
tory–– though if you should choose mutually, after ful ﬁlling this
obligation, to do otherwise [with the bride-gift], you will not beblamed: God is all knowing and all wise.
25If any of you does not have the means to marry a believing free
woman, then marry a believing slave– – God knows best [the depth
of] your faith: you are [all] part of the same family
b–– so marry them
with their people’s consent and their proper bride-gifts. [Makethem] married women, not adulteresses or lovers. If they commitadultery when they are married, their punishment will be half that offree women. This is for those of you who fear that you will sin; it isbetter for you to practise self-restraint. God is most forgiving andmerciful, 26He wishes to make His laws clear to you and guide you to
the righteous ways of those who went before you. He wishes to turn
towards you in mercy– – He is all knowing, all wise– –27He wishes to
turn towards you, but those who follow their lusts want you to go farastray. 28God wishes to lighten your burden; man was created weak.
29You who believe, do not wrongfully consume each other’s wealth
but trade by mutual consent. Do not kill each other, for God ismerciful to you. 30If any of you does these things, out of hostility and
injustice, We shall make him su ﬀer Fire: that is easy for God. 31But if
you avoid the great sins you have been forbidden, We shall wipe
out your minor misdeeds and let you in through the entrance of
honour. 32Do not covet what God has given to some of you more than
others– – men have the portion they have earned;
c and women the
aSlave women were often unclaimed war captives, who would not be in a position to
dissolve any previous marriage. An owner was not permitted to touch a slave womanwhose husband was with her (Abu Hanifa, in Razi).
bLiterally ‘you are from one another’.
cThe preposition min here is taken to have an explanatory rather than a partitive
function, which would render the translation ‘some of what they have earned’.Women 53 4:32portion they have earned– – you should rather ask God for some of
His bounty: He has full knowledge of everything. 33We have
appointed heirs for everything that parents and close relatives leavebehind, including those to whom you have pledged your hands [inmarriage], so give them their share: God is witness to everything.
34Husbands should take good care of their wives, with
a [the boun-
ties] God has given to some more than others and with what theyspend out of their own money. Righteous wives are devout and guardwhat God would have them guard in their husbands’ absence. If youfear high-handedness
b from your wives, remind them [of the teach-
ings of God], then ignore them when you go to bed, then hit them.c
If they obey you, you have no right to act against them: God ismost high and great. 35If you [believers] fear that a couple may break
up, appoint one arbiter from his family and one from hers. Then,if the couple want to put things right, God will bring about areconciliation between them: He is all knowing, all aware.
36Worship God; join nothing with Him. Be good to your parents,
to relatives, to orphans, to the needy, to neighbours near and far, totravellers in need, and to your slaves. God does not like arrogant,boastful people, 37who are miserly and order other people to be the
same, hiding the bounty God has given them. We have prepared a
humiliating torment for such ungrateful people. 38[Nor does He like
those] who spend their wealth to show o ﬀ, who do not believe in
Him or the Last Day. Whoever has Satan as his companion has anevil companion! 39What harm would it do them to believe in God
and the Last Day, and give charitably from the sustenance God hasgiven them? God knows them well. 40He does not wrong anyone by
as much as the weight of a speck of dust: He doubles any good deedand gives a tremendous reward of His own. 41What will they do
when We bring a witness from each community, with you [Muham-mad] as a witness against these people? 42On that day, those who
disbelieved and disobeyed the Prophet will wish that the earth couldswallow them up: they will not be able to hide anything from God.
abi is interpreted as instrumental rather than causal.
bThe verb nashaza  from which nushuz  is derived means ‘to become high’, ‘to rise’.
See also verse 128, where the same word is applied to husbands. It applies to a situation
where one partner assumes superiority to the other and behaves accordingly.
cThis signi ﬁes a single blow, as is clear from the circumstances of the revelation of
this verse. See also Abdel Haleem, Understanding the Qur ᾿an,46–54.The Qur ᾿an 4:33 5443You who believe, do not come anywhere near the prayer if you
are intoxicated,a not until you know what you are saying; nor if you
are in a state of major ritual impurity– – though you may pass
through the mosqueb–– not until you have bathed; if you are ill, on a
journey, have relieved yourselves, or had intercourse, and cannot ﬁnd
any water, then ﬁnd some clean sandc and wipe your faces and hands
with it. God is always ready to pardon and forgive.
44[Prophet], have you not considered how those who were given a
share of the Scripture purchase misguidance and want you
[believers], too, to lose the right path? 45God knows your enemies
best: God is enough to protect and to help you. 46Some Jews distort
the meaning of [revealed] words: they say, ‘We hear and disobey,’ and
‘Listen,’ [adding the insult] ‘May you not hear,’ and ‘ Ra ῾ina [Look at
us],’d twisting it abusively with their tongues so as to disparage
religion. If they had said, ‘We hear and obey,’ ‘Listen,’ and ‘ Unzurna
[Look at us],’ that would have been better and more proper for them.But God has spurned them for their de ﬁance; they believe very little.
47People of the Book, believe in what We have sent down to con-
ﬁrm what you already have before We wipe out [your sense of ]
direction,
e turning you back, or reject you, as We rejected those who
broke the Sabbath: God’s will is always done. 48God does not forgive
the joining of partners with Him: anything less than that He forgivesto whoever He will, but anyone who joins partners with God hasconcocted a tremendous sin. 49[Prophet], have you considered those
who claim purity for themselves? No! God puri ﬁes whoever He
will: no one will be wronged by as much as the husk of a date stone.50See how they invent lies about God, this in itself is a ﬂagrant
sin! 51Do you not see how those given a share of the Scripture,
[evidently] now believe in idols and evil powers? They say of thedisbelievers, ‘They are more rightly guided than the believers.’
f
52Those are the ones God has rejected: you [Prophet] will not ﬁnd
aThe prohibition of intoxicants was introduced by stages, and they were eventually
made completely unlawful. Cf. 2:219;5:90–1.
bor ‘unless you are on a journey’.
cThe term sa ῾id means dust or earth or soil or sand.
dCf. note to 2:104.
eLiterally ‘obliterate faces’. Another meaning of wujuh  (faces) is ‘directions’ (Razi).
fThis is taken to refer to an actual event in which a group of disbelieving Meccans
went to two eminent Jewish ﬁgures for counsel on the truth of Muhammad’s teachings
and were told that the pagans were more rightly guided than the Muslims.Women 55 4:52anyone to help those God has rejected. 53Do they have any share
of what He possesses? If they did they would not give away somuch as the groove of a date stone. 54Do they envy [other] people
for the bounty
a God has granted them? We gave the descendants of
Abraham the Scripture and wisdom– – and We gave them a great
kingdom– –55but some of them believed in itb and some turned away
from it. Hell blazes ﬁercely enough. 56We shall send those who reject
Our revelations to the Fire. When their skins have been burned away,We shall replace them with new ones so that they may continue tofeel the pain: God is mighty and wise. 57As for those who believe and
do good deeds, We shall admit them into Gardens graced with ﬂow-
ing streams and there they will remain forever. They will have pure
spouses there, and We shall admit them into cool refreshing shade.
58God commands you [people] to return things entrusted to you
to their rightful owners, and, if you judge between people, to do sowith justice: God’s instructions to you are excellent, for He hearsand sees everything. 59You who believe, obey God and the Messen-
ger, and those in authority among you. If you are in dispute over anymatter, refer it to God and the Messenger, if you truly believe inGod and the Last Day: that is better and fairer in the end. 60Do you
[Prophet] not see those who claim to believe in what has been sentdown to you, and in what was sent down before you, yet still want toturn to unjust tyrants
c for judgement, although they have been
ordered to reject them? Satan wants to lead them far astray. 61When
they are told, ‘Turn to God’s revelations and the Messenger [forjudgement],’ you see the hypocrites turn right away from you[Prophet]. 62If disaster strikes them because of what they them-
selves have done, then they will come to you, swearing by God, ‘Weonly wanted to do good and achieve harmony.’ 63God knows well
what is in the hearts of these people, so ignore what they say,instruct them, and speak to them about themselves using penetratingwords.
64All the messengers We sent were meant to be obeyed, by God’s
leave. If only [the hypocrites] had come to you [Prophet] when they
ai.e. the Prophethood given to Muhammad.
bThe pronoun hi here refers to either (i) the Scripture or (ii) Abraham.
cThe Arabic taghut  is variously interpreted to refer to idols, a speci ﬁc tyrant, an
oracle, or an opponent of the Prophet.The Qur ᾿an 4:53 56wronged themselves, and begged God’s forgiveness, and the
Messenger had asked forgiveness for them, they would have foundthat God accepts repentance and is most merciful. 65By your Lord,
they will not be true believers until they let you decide between themin all matters of dispute, and ﬁnd no resistance in their souls to your
decisions, accepting them totally– –66if We had ordered, ‘Lay down
your lives’ or ‘Leave your homes,’ they would not have done so,except for a few– – it would have been far better for them and
stronger con ﬁrmation of their faith, if they had done as they were
told, 67and We would have given them a rich reward of Our own
68and guided them to a straight path. 69Whoever obeys God and the
Messenger will be among those He has blessed: the messengers, thetruthful, those who bear witness to the truth,
a and the righteous– –
what excellent companions these are! 70That is God’s favour. No one
knows better than Him.
71You who believe, be on your guard. March [to battle] in small
groups or as one body. 72Among you there is the sort of person who
is sure to lag behind: if a calamity befalls you, he says, ‘God has beengracious to me that I was not there with them,’ 73yet he is sure to say,
if you are favoured by God, ‘If only I had been with them, I couldhave made great gains,’ as if there had been no ties of a ﬀection
between you and him. 74Let those of you who are willing to trade the
life of this world for the life to come, ﬁght in God’s way. To anyone
who ﬁghts in God’s way, whether killed or victorious, We shall give a
great reward. 75Why should you not ﬁght in God’s cause and for
those oppressed men, women, and children who cry out, ‘Lord,
rescue us from this town whose people are oppressors! By Yourgrace, give us a protector and give us a helper!’? 76The believers ﬁght
for God’s cause, while those who reject faith ﬁght for an unjust
cause.
b Fight the allies of Satan: Satan’s strategies are truly weak.
77[Prophet], do you not see those who were told, ‘Restrain your-
selves from ﬁghting, perform the prayer, and pay the prescribed
alms’? When ﬁghting was ordained for them, some of them feared
men as much as, or even more than, they feared God, saying, ‘Lord,why have You ordained ﬁghting for us? If only You would give us
just a little more time.’ Say to them, ‘Little is the enjoyment in this
aMartyrs bear witness to the truth with their lives (Razi).
bAgain this is the term taghut , which has a multitude of meanings. See note to
verse 60.Women 57 4:77world, the Hereafter is far better for those who are mindful of God:
you will not be wronged by as much as the ﬁbre in a date stone.
78Death will overtake you no matter where you may be, even inside
high towers.’ When good fortune comes their way, they say, ‘This isfrom God,’ but when harm befalls them, they say, ‘This is from you[Prophet].’ Say to them, ‘Both come from God.’ What is the matterwith these people that they can barely understand what they aretold? 79Anything good that happens to you [Prophet] is from God;
anything bad is [ultimately] from yourself. We have sent you as amessenger to people; God is su ﬃcient witness. 80Whoever obeys the
Messenger obeys God. If some pay no heed, We have not sent you tobe their keeper. 81They say, ‘We obey you,’ but as soon as they leave
your presence, some of them scheme by night to do other than whatyou said. God records what they scheme, so leave them alone, andput your trust in God: He is su ﬃcient protector.
82Will they not think about this Qur ᾿an? If it had been from
anyone other than God, they would have found much inconsistencyin it. 83Whenever news of any matter comes to them, whether
concerning peace or war, they spread it about; if they referred it to
the Messenger and those in authority among them, those seekingits meaning would have found it out from them. If it were notfor God’s bounty and mercy towards you, you would almost all havefollowed Satan.
84So [Prophet] ﬁght in God’s way. You are accountable only for
yourself. Urge the believers on. God may well curb the power of
the disbelievers, for He is stronger in might and more terrible
in punishment. 85Whoever speaks for
a a good cause will share in
its bene ﬁts and whoever speaks for a bad cause will share in its
burden: God controls everything. 86But [even in battle] when you
[believers] are o ﬀered a greeting, respond with a better one, or at
least return it:b God keeps account of everything. 87He is God: there
is no god but Him. He will gather you all together on the Day ofResurrection, about which there is no doubt. Whose word can betruer than God’s?
aIt is reported that an individual asked the Prophet to exempt another from going
into battle. ‘Speaks for’ is one of the meanings of shafa ῾a as explained by Razi, and it is
more ﬁtting for the context of urging the believer to ﬁght in God’s cause here. The other
meaning, ‘intercedes’, adopted by most translators does not ﬁt with the context.
bSee4:94 and Razi’s comment.The Qur ᾿an 4:78 5888[Believers], why are you divided in two about the hypocrites,
when God Himself has rejected them because of what they havedone? Do you want to guide those God has left to stray? If God leavesanyone to stray, you [Prophet] will never ﬁnd the way for him. 89They
would dearly like you to reject faith, as they themselves have done, tobe like them. So do not take them as allies until they migrate [toMedina] for God’s cause. If they turn [on you],
a then seize and kill
them wherever you encounter them.b Take none of them as an ally or
supporter. 90But as for those who seek refuge with people with whom
you have a treaty, or who come over to you because their hearts shrinkfrom ﬁghting against you or against their own people, God could
have given them power over you, and they would have fought you. Soif they withdraw and do not ﬁght you, and o ﬀer you peace, then God
gives you no way against them. 91You will ﬁnd others who wish to be
safe from you, and from their own people, but whenever they are backin a situation where they are tempted [to ﬁght you], they succumb to
it. So if they neither withdraw, nor o ﬀer you peace, nor restrain
themselves from ﬁghting you, seize and kill them wherever you
encounter them: We give you clear authority against such people.
92Never should a believer kill another believer, except by mistake.
If anyone kills a believer by mistake he must free one Muslim slaveand pay compensation to the victim’s relatives, unless they charitablyforgo it; if the victim belonged to a people at war with you but is abeliever, then the compensation is only to free a believing slave; if hebelonged to a people with whom you have a treaty, then compensa-tion should be handed over to his relatives, and a believing slave setfree. Anyone who lacks the means to do this must fast for two con-secutive months by way of repentance to God: God is all knowing,all wise. 93If anyone kills a believer deliberately, the punishment for
him is Hell, and there he will remain: God is angry with him, andrejects him, and has prepared a tremendous torment for him. 94So,
you who believe, be careful when you go to ﬁght in God’s way, and
do not say to someone who o ﬀers you a greeting of peace, ‘You are
not a believer,’
c out of desire for the chance gains of this life– – God
aThat ‘turn with aggression’ is the intended meaning is clear from the context. Cf.
4:91.
bSee2:191.
cA Muslim killed someone in battle who had given him the Muslim greeting,
thinking that the man was trying to save himself, but the Prophet condemned this.Women 59 4:94has plenty of gains for you. You yourself were in the same position
[once], but God was gracious to you, so be careful: God is fullyaware of what you do.
95Those believers who stay at home, apart from those with an
incapacity, are not equal to those who commit themselves and theirpossessions to striving in God’s way. God has raised such peopleto a rank above those who stay at home– – although He has promised
all believers a good reward, those who strive are favoured with a
tremendous reward above those who stay at home– –96high ranks
conferred by Him, as well as forgiveness, and mercy: God is mostforgiving and merciful.
97When the angels take the souls of those who have wronged
themselves,
a they ask them, ‘What circumstances were you in?’
They reply, ‘We were oppressed in this land,’ and the angels say,‘But was God’s earth not spacious enough for you to migrate tosome other place?’ These people will have Hell as their refuge, anevil destination, 98but not so the truly helpless men, women, and
children who have no means in their power nor any way to leave– –
99God may well pardon these, for He is most pardoning and most
forgiving. Anyone who migrates for God’s cause will ﬁnd many a
refuge and great plenty in the earth, 100and if anyone leaves home as
a migrant towards God and His Messenger and is then overtaken bydeath, his reward from God is sure. God is most forgiving and mostmerciful.
101When you [believers] are travelling in the land, you will not be
blamed for shortening your prayers, if you fear the disbelievers mayharm you: they are your sworn enemies. 102When you [Prophet] are
with the believers, leading them in prayer, let a group of them standup in prayer with you, taking their weapons with them, and whenthey have ﬁnished their prostration, let them take up their positions
at the back. Then let the other group, who have not yet prayed, praywith you, also on their guard and armed with their weapons: thedisbelievers would dearly like you to be heedless of your weaponsand baggage, in order for them to take you in a single assault. Youwill not be blamed if you lay aside your arms when you are overtaken
by heavy rain or illness, but be on your guard. Indeed, God has
prepared a humiliating punishment for the disbelievers. 103After
aBy living in a place where they are unable to practise their religion.The Qur ᾿an 4:95 60performing the ritual prayer, continue to remember God– – standing,
sitting, and lying on your sides– – and once you are safe, keep up
regular prayer, for prayer is obligatory for the believers at prescribedtimes. 104Do not be faint-hearted in pursuing the enemy: if you
are su ﬀering hardship, so are they, but you hope to receive some-
thing from God for which they cannot hope. God is all knowingand wise.
105We have sent down the Scripture to you [Prophet] with the
truth so that you can judge between people in accordance with whatGod has shown you. Do not be an advocate for those who betraytrust.
a106Ask God for forgiveness: He is most forgiving and merci-
ful. 107Do not argue for those who betray their own souls: God does
not love anyone given to treachery and sin. 108They try to hide them-
selves from people, but they cannot hide from God. He is with themwhen they plot at night, saying things that do not please Him: He isfully aware of everything they do. 109There you [believers] are, argu-
ing on their behalf in this life, but who will argue on their behalfwith God on the Day of Resurrection? Who will be their defender?110Yet anyone who does evil or wrongs his own soul and then asks
God for forgiveness will ﬁnd Him most forgiving and merciful.
111He who commits sin does so against his own soul– – God is all
knowing and wise– –112and anyone who commits an o ﬀence or a sin,
and then throws the blame on to some innocent person, has bur-dened himself with deceit as well as ﬂagrant sin.
113If it were not for the grace of God and His mercy to you
[Prophet], a party of them would have tried to lead you astray; theyonly lead themselves astray, and cannot harm you in any way, sinceGod has sent down the Scripture and Wisdom to you, and taughtyou what you did not know. God’s bounty to you is great indeed.114There is no good in most of their secret talk, only in commanding
charity, or good, or reconciliation between people. To anyone whodoes these things, seeking to please God, We shall give a rich reward;115if anyone opposes the Messenger, after guidance has been made
clear to him, and follows a path other than that of the believers, Weshall leave him on his chosen path– – We shall burn him in Hell, an
evil destination.
aA man from Medina stole a suit of armour and accused a Jew of doing it. He
brought his family to ask the Prophet to rule against the Jew and he was about to do thiswhen these verses were revealed (Razi).Women 61 4:115116God does not forgive the worship of others beside Him– –
though He does forgive whoever He will for lesser sins– – for who-
ever does this has gone far, far astray. 117In His place the idolaters
invoke only females,a and Satan, the rebel 118God rejected, who
said, ‘I will certainly take my due share of Your servants; 119I will
mislead them and incite vain desires in them; I will commandthem to slit the ears of cattle;
b I will command them to tamper
with God’s creation.’ Whoever chooses Satan as a patron instead
of God is utterly ruined: 120he makes them promises and raises
false hopes, but Satan’s promises are nothing but delusion. 121Such
people will have Hell for their home and will ﬁnd no escape from
it, 122but We shall admit those who believe and do good deeds into
Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams, there to remain for ever– –a
true promise from God. Who speaks more truly than God? 123It
will not be according to your hopes or those of the People of theBook: anyone who does wrong will be requited for it and will ﬁnd
no one to protect or help him against God; 124anyone, male or
female, who does good deeds and is a believer, will enter Paradise
and will not be wronged by as much as the dip in a date stone.
125Who could be better in religion than those who direct themselves
wholly to God, do good, and follow the religion of Abraham, whowas true in faith? God took Abraham as a friend. 126It is to God
that everything in the heavens and earth belongs: God is fullyaware of all things.
127They ask you [Prophet] for a ruling about women. Say, ‘God
Himself gives you a ruling about them. You already have what has
been recited to you in the Scripture about orphan girls [in yourcharge] from whom you withhold the prescribed shares [of their
inheritance] and whom you wish to marry, and also about helplesschildren– – God instructs you to treat orphans fairly: He is well aware
of whatever good you do.’
128If a wife fears high-handedness or alienation from her husband,
neither of them will be blamed if they come to a peaceful settlement,for peace is best. Although human souls are prone to sel ﬁshness, if
you do good and are mindful of God, He is well aware of all that you
aSee also 53:19–20.
bAn example of pagan superstitious practices: they used to dedicate cattle to their
gods by slitting their ears.The Qur ᾿an 4:116 62do. 129You will never be able to treat your wives with equal fair-
ness, however much you may desire to do so, but do not ignore onewife altogether, leaving her suspended [between marriage anddivorce]. If you make amends and remain conscious of God, He ismost forgiving and merciful, 130but if husband and wife do separate,
God will provide for each out of His plenty: He is in ﬁnite in plenty,
and all wise. 131Everything in the heavens and the earth belongs
to God.
We have commanded those who were given the Scripture before
you, and We command you, to be mindful of God. Even if you doignore Him, everything in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him,and He is self-su ﬃcient, worthy of all praise. 132Yes, indeed, every-
thing in the heavens and the earth belongs to God, and He is enoughfor those who trust in Him. 133If He so willed, He could remove you
altogether and replace you with new people: He has full power todo so. 134If some want the rewards of this world, the rewards of this
world and the next are both God’s to give: He hears and seeseverything.
135You who believe, uphold justice and bear witness to God, even
if it is against yourselves, your parents, or your close relatives.Whether the person is rich or poor, God can best take care of both.Refrain from following your own desire, so that you can act justly– –
if you distort or neglect justice, God is fully aware of what you do.136You who believe, believe in God and His Messenger and in the
Scripture He sent down to His Messenger, as well as what He sent
down before. Anyone who does not believe in God, His angels, HisScriptures, His messengers, and the Last Day has gone far, far astray.137As for those who believe, then reject the faith, then believe again,
then reject the faith again and become increasingly de ﬁant, God will
not forgive them, nor will He guide them on any path. 138[Prophet],
tell such hypocrites that an agonizing torment awaits them.
139Do those who ally themselves with the disbelievers rather than
the believers seek power through them? In reality all power is God’sto give. 140As He has already revealed to you [believers] in the Scrip-
ture, if you hear people denying and ridiculing God’s revelation, donot sit with them unless they start to talk of other things, or else youyourselves will become like them:
a God will gather all the hypocrites
aSee6:68–– an earlier, Meccan sura.Women 63 4:140and disbelievers together into Hell. 141The [hypocrites] wait to see
what happens to you and, if God brings you success, they say, ‘Werewe not on your side?’ but if the disbelievers have some success, theysay to them, ‘Did we not have the upper hand over you, and [yet]protect you from the believers?’ God will judge between you all onthe Day of Resurrection, and He will give the disbelievers no meansof overcoming the believers.
142The hypocrites try to deceive God, but it is He who causes
them to be deceived. When they stand up to pray, they do so slug-gishly, showing o ﬀ in front of people, and remember God only a
little, 143wavering all the time between this and that, belonging nei-
ther to one side nor the other. If God leaves someone to stray, you[Prophet] will never ﬁnd a way for him. 144You who believe, do not
take the disbelievers as allies and protectors instead of the believers:do you want to o ﬀer God clear proof against you? 145The hypocrites
will be in the lowest depths of Hell, and you will ﬁnd no one to help
them. 146Not so those who repent, mend their ways, hold fast to
God, and devote their religion entirely to Him: these will be joinedwith the believers, and God will give the believers a mighty reward.147Why should God make you su ﬀer torment if you are thankful and
believe in Him? God always rewards gratitude and He knows every-thing. 148God does not like bad words to be made public unless
someone has been wronged: He is all hearing and all knowing. 149If
you do good, openly or in secret, or if you pardon something bad,
a
then God is most forgiving and powerful.
150As for those who ignore God and His messengers and want to
make a distinction between them, saying, ‘We believe in some but
not in others,’ seeking a middle way, 151they are really disbelievers:
We have prepared a humiliating punishment for those who dis-believe. 152But God will give [due] rewards to those who believe in
Him and His messengers and make no distinction between any ofthem. God is most forgiving and merciful.
153The People of the Book demand that you [Prophet] make a
book physically come down to them from heaven, but theydemanded even more than that of Moses when they said, ‘Show usGod face to face,’ and were struck by the thunderbolt for their
aRazi suggests that this means: if the hypocrites repent, the believers should not
taunt them for what they did in the past.The Qur ᾿an 4:141 64presumption. Even after clear revelations had come down to them,
they took the calf as an object of worship, yet We pardoned this, andgave Moses clear authority; 154We made the mountain tower high
above them at their pledge; We said to them, ‘Enter the gate
a hum-
bly,’ and, ‘Do not break the Sabbath,’ and took a solemn pledge fromthem. 155And so for breaking their pledge, for rejecting God’s revela-
tions, for unjustly killing their prophets, for saying ‘Our minds are
closed’
b–– No! God has sealed them in their disbelief, so they believe
only a little– –156and because they disbelieved and uttered a terrible
slander against Mary, 157and said, ‘We have killed the Messiah, Jesus,
son of Mary, the Messenger of God.’ (They did not kill him, nor didthey crucify him, though it was made to appear like that to them;those that disagreed about him are full of doubt, with no knowledgeto follow, only supposition: they certainly did not kill him– –158God
raised him up to Himself. God is almighty and wise. 159There is not
one of the People of the Book who will not believe in [Jesus] beforehis death, and on the Day of Resurrection he will be a witnessagainst them.) 160For the wrongdoings done by the Jews, We forbade
them certain good things that had been permitted to them before: forhaving frequently debarred others from God’s path; 161for taking
usury when they had been forbidden to do so; and for wrongfullydevouring other people’s property. For those of them that reject thetruth we have prepared an agonizing torment. 162But those of them
who are well grounded in knowledge and have faith do believe inwhat has been revealed to you [Muhammad], and in what wasrevealed before you– – those who perform the prayers, pay the pre-
scribed alms, and believe in God and the Last Day– – to them We
shall give a great reward.
163We have sent revelation to you [Prophet] as We did to Noah and
the prophets after him, to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and theTribes, to Jesus, Job, Jonah, Aaron, and Solomon– – to David We gave
the book [of Psalms]– –164to other messengers We have already
mentioned to you, and also to some We have not. To Moses Godspoke directly. 165They were messengers bearing good news and
warning, so that mankind would have no excuse before God, once
aThe gate of the town mentioned in 2:58;7:161.
bLiterally ‘our hearts are covered’, or ‘encased’. Cf. 2:88.Women 65 4:165the messengers had been sent: God is almighty and all wise. 166But
God Himself bears witness to what He has sent down to you– –H e
sent it down with His full knowledge– – the angels too bear witness,
though God is su ﬃcient witness. 167Those who have disbelieved and
barred others from God’s path have gone far astray; 168God will not
forgive those who have disbelieved and do evil, nor will He guidethem to any path 169except that of Hell, where they will remain for
ever– – this is easy for God.
170The Messenger has come to you [people] with the truth from
your Lord, so believe– – that is best for you– – for even if you dis-
believe, all that is in the heavens and the earth still belongs to God,and He is all knowing and all wise. 171People of the Book, do not go
to excess in your religion, and do not say anything about God exceptthe truth: the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, was nothing more than amessenger of God, His word, directed to Mary, a spirit from Him.So believe in God and His messengers and do not speak of a‘Trinity’– – stop [this], that is better for you– – God is only one God,
He is far above having a son, everything in the heavens and earthbelongs to Him and He is the best one to trust. 172The Messiah would
never disdain to be a servant of God, nor would the angels who areclose to Him. He will gather before Him all those who disdain Hisworship and are arrogant: 173to those who believe and do good works
He will give due rewards and more of His bounty; to those who aredisdainful and arrogant He will give an agonizing torment, and theywillﬁnd no one besides God to protect or help them.
174People, convincing proof has come to you from your Lord and
We have sent a clear light down to you. 175God will admit those who
believe in Him and hold fast to Him into His mercy and favour; He
will guide them towards Him on a straight path.
176They ask you [Prophet] for a ruling. Say, ‘God gives you a
ruling
a about inheritance from someone who dies childless with no
surviving parents. If a man leaves a sister, she is entitled to half of theinheritance; if she has no child her brother is her sole heir; if thereare two sisters, they are entitled to two-thirds of the inheritancebetween them, but if there are surviving brothers and sisters, themale is entitled to twice the share of the female. God makes this clearto you so that you do not make mistakes: He has full knowledge ofeverything.’
aSee also verse 12.The Qur ᾿an 4:166 665. THE FEAST
The title relates to food, and a central theme of this Medinan sura is the
regulation of lawful and unlawful food, obedience to which is part of the pledgebetween God and the believers (verses 1–5,87–108). Part of the sura concerns
hunting for food during the pilgrimage and respect for the rites of pilgrimage.God had also taken pledges from the Jews and Christians and the section betweenverses 13 and 86 deals with what these two communities did to their pledges, and
with their relationships with the Muslims. The passage from verse 109 to the end
deals with the afterlife and the verdict of the messengers on the behaviour of theirrespective communities. Jesus, in particular, is given prominence here: mention is
made of the feast for which his disciples asked him to pray to God, which gives the
sura its title, and of his renunciation of any claim to divinity.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1You who believe, ful ﬁl your obligations.a Livestock animals are
lawful as food for you, with the exception of what is about to beannounced to you. You are forbidden to kill game while you are onpilgrimage– –God commands what He will, 2so, you who believe, do
not violate the sanctity of God’s rites, the Sacred Month, the o ﬀer-
ings, their garlands, nor those going to the Sacred House to seek thebounty and pleasure of their Lord– –but when you have completedthe rites of pilgrimage you may hunt. Do not let your hatred for thepeople who barred you from the Sacred Mosque induce you to breakthe law: help one another to do what is right and good; do not help
one another towards sin and hostility. Be mindful of God, for His
punishment is severe.
3You are forbidden to eat carrion; blood; pig’s meat; any animal over
which any name other than God’s has been invoked; any animalstrangled, or victim of a violent blow or a fall, or gored or savaged by abeast of prey, unless you still slaughter it [in the correct manner];or anything sacri ﬁced on idolatrous altars. You are also forbidden
to allot shares [of meat] by drawing marked arrows
b– –a heinous
aObligations consequent on accepting the faith, including its dietary prohibitions.
See verse 7, ‘pledge’.
bA pagan Arab custom. Arrows were also used to make other decisions, as in drawing
lots, to determine the will of the idols (see verse 90).practice– – today the disbelievers have lost all hope that you will
give up your religion. Do not fear them: fear Me. Today I haveperfected your religion for you, completed My blessing upon you,and chosen as your religion islam : [total devotion to God]; but if
any of you is forced by hunger to eat forbidden food, with nointention of doing wrong, then God is most forgiving andmerciful.
4They ask you, Prophet, what is lawful for them. Say, ‘All good
things are lawful for you.’ [This includes] what you have taughtyour birds and beasts of prey to catch, teaching them as God hastaught you, so eat what they catch for you, but ﬁrst pronounce
God’s name over it. Be mindful of God: He is swift to take account.5Today all good things have been made lawful for you. The food of
the People of the Book is lawful for you as your food is lawful forthem. So are chaste, believing, women as well as chaste women ofthe people who were given the Scripture before you, as long as youhave given them their bride-gifts and married them, not taking themas lovers or secret mistresses. The deeds of anyone who rejects faithwill come to nothing, and in the Hereafter he will be one of thelosers.
6You who believe, when you are about to pray, wash your faces and
your hands up to the elbows, wipe your heads, wash your feet up tothe ankles and, if required,
a wash your whole body. If any of you is
sick or on a journey, or has just relieved himself, or had intimatecontact with a woman, and can ﬁnd no water, then take some clean
sand and wipe your face and hands with it. God does not wish toplace any burden on you: He only wishes to cleanse you and perfectHis blessing on you, so that you may be thankful.
b7Remember
God’s blessing on you and the pledge with which you were bound
when you said, ‘We hear and we obey.’ Be mindful of God: God has
full knowledge of the secrets of the heart.
8You who believe, be steadfast in your devotion to God and bear
witness impartially: do not let hatred of othersc lead you away from
ae.g. after sexual intercourse or discharging semen.
b‘Perfecting the blessing’ is seen in instructing believers to avoid what is unclean in
food and to wash before worship. This is also noted in 4:43, where there is an instruc-
tion to wash before the prayer following an instruction to keep away from the pollutionof the immoral acts mentioned in the preceding verses.
cThis resumes the instruction in vv . 1–2.The Qur ᾿an 5:4 68justice, but adhere to justice, for that is closer to awareness of God.
Be mindful of God: God is well aware of all that you do. 9God has
promised forgiveness and a rich reward to those who have faith anddo good works; 10those who reject faith and deny Our revelations will
inhabit the blazing Fire.
11You who believe, remember God’s blessing on you when a
certain people were about to raise their hands against you and Herestrained them. Be mindful of God: let the believers put their trustin Him.
12God took a pledge from the Children of Israel. We made
twelve leaders arise among them, and God said, ‘I am with you: if youkeep up the prayer, pay the prescribed alms, believe in My messen-gers and support them, and lend God a good loan,
a I will wipe out
your sins and admit you into Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams.
Any of you who now ignore this [pledge] will be far from the rightpath.’ 13But they broke their pledge, so We distanced them [from
Us] and hardened their hearts. They distort the meaning of[revealed] words and have forgotten some of what they were toldto remember: you [Prophet] will always ﬁnd treachery in all but a
few of them. Overlook this and pardon them: God loves thosewho do good. 14We also took a pledge from those who say, ‘We are
Christians,’ but they too forgot some of what they were told toremember, so We stirred up enmity and hatred among them until theDay of Resurrection, when God will tell them what they have done.
15People of the Book, Our Messenger has come to make clear to
you much of what you have kept hidden of the Scripture, and tooverlook much [you have done]. A light has now come to you fromGod, and a Scripture making things clear, 16with which God guides
to the ways of peace those who follow what pleases Him, bringingthem from darkness out into light, by His will, and guiding them to astraight path. 17Those who say, ‘God is the Messiah, the son of
Mary,’ are defying the truth. Say, ‘If it had been God’s will, couldanyone have prevented Him from destroying the Messiah, son ofMary, together with his mother and everyone else on earth? Controlof the heavens and earth and all that is between them belongs toGod: He creates whatever He will.
b God has power over everything.’
aGod repays what is given for His sake, many times over. The Qur ᾿an uses this ﬁgure
of speech in many instances. See, for example, 57:18;64:17.
bIncluding his creation of Jesus without a father ( 3:47 and 59).The Feast 69 5:1718The Jews and the Christians say, ‘We are the children of God and
His beloved ones.’ Say, ‘Then why does He punish you for yoursins? You are merely human beings, part of His creation: He for-gives whoever He will and punishes whoever He will. Control ofthe heavens and earth and all that is between them belongs to Him:all journeys lead to Him.’ 19People of the Book, Our Messenger
comes to you now, after a break in the sequence of messengers, tomake things clear for you in case you should say, ‘No one has cometo give us good news or to warn us.’ So someone has come to you, togive you good news and warn you: God has the power to do allthings.
20Moses said to his people, ‘My people, remember God’s blessing
on you: how He raised prophets among you and appointed kings foryou and gave you what he had not given to any other people. 21My
people, go into the holy land which God has ordained for you– –d o
not turn back or you will be the losers.’ 22They said, ‘Moses, there is
a fearsome people in this land. We will not go there until they leave.If they leave, then we will enter.’ 23Yet two men whom God had
blessed among those who were afraid said, ‘Go in to them throughthe gate and when you go in you will overcome them. If you are truebelievers, put your trust in God.’ 24They said, ‘Moses, we will never
enter while they are still there, so you and your Lord go in and ﬁght,
and we will stay here.’ 25He said, ‘Lord, I have authority over no one
except myself and my brother: judge between the two of us and thesedisobedient people.’ 26God said, ‘The land is forbidden to them for
forty years: they will wander the earth aimlessly. Do not grieve over
those who disobey.’
27[Prophet], tell them the truth about the story of Adam’s two
sons: each of them o ﬀered a sacri ﬁce, and it was accepted from one
and not the other. One said, ‘I will kill you,’ but the other said, ‘Godonly accepts the sacri ﬁce of those who are mindful of Him. 28If you
raise your hand to kill me, I will not raise mine to kill you. I fearGod, the Lord of all worlds, 29and I would rather you were burdened
with my sins as well as yours and became an inhabitant of the Fire:such is the evildoers’ reward.’ 30But his soul prompted him to kill
his brother: he killed him and became one of the losers. 31God sent
a raven to scratch up the ground and show him how to coverhis brother’s corpse and he said, ‘Woe is me! Could I not have beenlike this raven and covered up my brother’s body?’ He becameThe Qur ᾿an 5:18 70remorseful. 32On account of [his deed], We decreed to the Children
of Israel that if anyone kills a person– – unless in retribution for
murder or spreading corruption in the land– – it is as if he kills all
mankind, while if any saves a life it is as if he saves the lives of allmankind. Our messengers came to them with clear signs, but manyof them continued to commit excesses in the land. 33Those who
wage war against God and His Messenger and strive to spread cor-
ruption in the land should be punished by death, cruci ﬁxion, the
amputation of an alternate hand and foot,
a or banishment from the
land: a disgrace for them in this world, and then a terrible punish-ment in the Hereafter, 34unless they repent before you overpower
them– – in that case bear in mind that God is forgiving and merciful.
35You who believe, be mindful of God, seek ways to come closer to
Him and strive for His cause, so that you may prosper. 36If the
disbelievers possessed all that is in the earth and twice as much againand o ﬀered it to ransom themselves from torment on the Day of
Resurrection, it would not be accepted from them– – they will have a
painful torment. 37They will wish to come out of the Fire but they
will be unable to do so: theirs will be a lasting torment.
38Cut o ﬀ the hands of thieves, whether they are man or woman,
as punishment for what they have done– – a deterrent from God:
God is almighty and wise. 39But if anyone repents after his wrong-
doing and makes amends, God will accept his repentance: God ismost forgiving, most merciful. 40Do you [Prophet] not know that
control of the heavens and earth belongs solely to God? He punisheswhoever He will and forgives whoever He will: God has power overeverything.
41Messenger, do not be grieved by those who race to surpass one
another in disbelief– – those who say with their mouths, ‘We believe,’
but have no faith in their hearts, and the Jews who listen eagerly tolies and to those who have not even met you, who distort the mean-ings of [revealed] words and say [to each other], ‘If you are given thisruling, accept it, but if you are not, then beware!’
b– –if God intends
aLeft hand and right foot or vice versa.
bAccording to most interpreters, this refers to a case where an eminent Jewish man
and woman committed adultery. The Jewish community did not want to apply thebiblical penalty of stoning, so they sent representatives to the Prophet to ask for a ruling,saying, ‘If he orders you to apply lashing accept it, but if he orders stoning, do not acceptit’ (Razi).The Feast 71 5:41some people to be so misguided, you will be powerless against God
on their behalf. These are the ones whose hearts God does not intendto cleanse– – a disgrace for them in this world, and then a heavy pun-
ishment in the Hereafter– –42they listen eagerly to lies and consume
what is unlawful. If they come to you [Prophet] for judgement, youcan either judge between them, or decline– – if you decline, they will
not harm you in any way, but if you do judge between them, judge
justly: God loves the just– –43but why do they come to you for judge-
ment when they have the Torah with God’s judgement, and even
then still turn away? These are not believers. 44We revealed the
Torah with guidance and light, and the prophets, who had submittedto God, judged according to it for the Jews. So did the rabbis and the
scholars in accordance with that part of God’s Scripture which they
were entrusted to preserve, and to which they were witnesses. So[rabbis and scholars] do not fear people, fear Me; do not barter awayMy messages for a small price; those who do not judge according towhat God has sent down are rejecting [God’s teachings]. 45In the
Torah We prescribed for them a life for a life, an eye for an eye, anose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a tooth for a tooth, an equal woundfor a wound: if anyone forgoes this out of charity, it will serve asatonement for his bad deeds. Those who do not judge according towhat God has revealed are doing grave wrong.
46We sent Jesus, son of Mary, in their footsteps, to con ﬁrm the
Torah that had been sent before him: We gave him the Gospel withguidance, light, and con ﬁrmation of the Torah already revealed– –
a guide and lesson for those who take heed of God. 47So let the
followers of the Gospel judge according to what God has sent downin it. Those who do not judge according to what God has revealedare lawbreakers.
48We sent to you [Muhammad] the Scripture with the truth, con-
ﬁrming the Scriptures that came before it, and with ﬁnal authority
over them: so judge between them according to what God has sentdown. Do not follow their whims, which deviate from the truth thathas come to you. We have assigned a law and a path to each of you. IfGod had so willed, He would have made you one community, but He
wanted to test you through that which He has given you, so race todo good: you will all return to God and He will make clear to you the
matters you di ﬀered about. 49So [Prophet] judge between them
according to what God has sent down. Do not follow their whims,The Qur ᾿an 5:42 72and take good care that they do not tempt you away from any of what
God has sent down to you. If they turn away, remember that Godintends to punish them for some of the sins they have committed:a great many people are lawbreakers. 50Do they want judgement
according to the time of pagan ignorance? Is there any better judgethan God for those of ﬁrm faith?
51You who believe, do not take the Jews and Christians as allies:
a
they are allies only to each other. Anyone who takes them as an ally
becomes one of them– – God does not guide such wrongdoers– –52yet
you [Prophet] will see the perverse at heart rushing to them forprotection, saying, ‘We are afraid fortune may turn against us.’ ButGod may well bring about a triumph or some other event of His ownmaking: then they will rue the secrets they harboured in their hearts,
53and the believers will say, ‘Are these the men who swore by God
using their strongest oaths that they were with you?’ All they did wasin vain: they have lost everything.
54You who believe, if any of you go back on your faith,
b God will
soon replace you with people He loves and who love Him, peoplewho are humble towards the believers, hard on the disbelievers, and
who strive in God’s way without fearing anyone’s reproach. Such isGod’s favour. He grants it to whoever He will. God has endlessbounty and knowledge. 55Your true allies are God, His Messenger,
and the believers– – those who keep up the prayer, pay the prescribed
alms, and bow down in worship. 56Those who turn for protection to
God, His Messenger, and the believers [are God’s party]: God’s partyis sure to triumph.
57You who believe, do not take as allies those who ridicule your
religion and make fun of it– – whether people who were given the
Scripture before you, or disbelievers– – and be mindful of God if you
are true believers. 58When you make the call to prayer, they ridicule
it and make fun of it: this is because they are people who do notreason. 59Say [Prophet], ‘People of the Book, do you resent us for
any reason other than the fact that we believe in God, in what has
been sent down to us, and in what was sent before us, while most ofyou are disobedient?’ 60Say, ‘Shall I tell you who deserves a worse
punishment from God than [the one you wish upon] us? Those God
ai.e. those who are against the Muslim camp, as is clear from the following verses,
up to 59. ‘Do not turn to them as allies in preference to the Muslims’ (see 4:144).
bWhat is intended in this context is ‘by taking them as allies’.The Feast 73 5:60distanced from Himself, was angry with, and condemned as apes and
pigs,a and those who worship idols: they are worse in rank and have
strayed further from the right path.
61When they come to you [believers], they say, ‘We believe,’ but
they come disbelieving and leave disbelieving– – God knows best
what they are hiding. 62You [Prophet] see many of them rushing into
sin and hostility and consuming what is unlawful. How evil theirpractices are! 63Why do their rabbis and scholars not forbid them to
speak sinfully and consume what is unlawful? How evil theirdeeds are! 64The Jews have said, ‘God is tight- ﬁsted,’ but it is they
who are tight- ﬁsted, and they are rejected for what they have said.
Truly, God’s hands are open wide: He gives as He pleases. What hasbeen sent down to you from your Lord is sure to increase insolenceand de ﬁance in many of them. We have sown enmity and hatred
amongst them till the Day of Resurrection. Whenever they kindletheﬁre of war, God will put it out. They try to spread corruption in
the land, but God does not love those who corrupt. 65If only the
People of the Book would believe and be mindful of God, We wouldtake away their sins and bring them into the Gardens of Delight. 66If
they had upheld the Torah and the Gospel and what was sent down
to them from their Lord, they would have been given abundancefrom above and from below: some of them are on the right course,but many of them do evil.
67Messenger, proclaim everything that has been sent down to you
from your Lord– – if you do not, then you will not have communicated
His message– – and God will protect you from people. God does not
guide those who defy Him. 68Say, ‘People of the Book, you have no
true basis [for your religion] unless you uphold the Torah, the Gospel,and that which has been sent down to you from your Lord,’ but whathas been sent down to you [Prophet] from your Lord is sure toincrease many of them in their insolence and de ﬁance: do not worry
about those who defy [God]. 69For the [Muslim] believers, the Jews,
the Sabians,
b and the Christians– – those who believe in God and the
Last Day and do good deeds– – there is no fear: they will not grieve.
70We took a pledge from the Children of Israel, and sent
aTabari (in his commentary on 2:65) regards this as metaphorical in the sense of ‘like
apes, pigs’. Compare the metaphorical use of ‘blind, deaf, dumb’– –2:18;5:71;8:22;
43:40; etc.
bSee note to 2:62.The Qur ᾿an 5:61 74messengers to them. Whenever a messenger brought them anything
they did not like, they accused some of lying and put others to death;71they thought no harm could come to them and so became blind and
deaf [to God]. God turned to them in mercy but many of them againbecame blind and deaf: God is fully aware of their actions. 72Those
who say, ‘God is the Messiah, son of Mary,’ have de ﬁed God. The
Messiah himself said, ‘Children of Israel, worship God, my Lord
and your Lord.’ If anyone associates others with God, God will
forbid him from the Garden, and Hell will be his home. No one willhelp such evildoers.
73Those people who say that God is the third of three are defying
[the truth]: there is only One God. If they persist in what they aresaying, a painful punishment will a ﬄict those of them who persist.
74Why do they not turn to God and ask His forgiveness,
when God is most forgiving, most merciful? 75The Messiah, son of
Mary, was only a messenger; other messengers had come and gonebefore him; his mother was a virtuous woman; both ate food [likeother mortals]. See how clear We make these signs for them; seehow deluded they are. 76Say, ‘How can you worship something
other than God, that has no power to do you harm or good? Godalone is the All Hearing and All Knowing.’ 77Say, ‘People of the
Book, do not overstep the bounds of truth in your religion and donot follow the whims of those who went astray before you– – they
led many others astray and themselves continue to stray from theeven path.’
78Those Children of Israel who de ﬁed [God] were rejected
through the words of David, and Jesus, son of Mary, because theydisobeyed, they persistently overstepped the limits, 79they did not
forbid each other to do wrong. How vile their deeds were! 80You
[Prophet] see many of them allying themselves with the disbelievers.How terrible is what their souls have stored up for them: God isangry with them and they will remain tormented. 81If they had
believed in God, in the Prophet, and in what was sent down to him,they would never have allied themselves with the disbelievers, butmost of them are rebels.
82You [Prophet] are sure to ﬁnd that the most hostile to the believers
are the Jews and those who associate other deities with God; you aresure to ﬁnd that the closest in a ﬀection towards the believers are those
who say, ‘We are Christians,’ for there are among them people devotedThe Feast
75 5:82to learning and ascetics.a These people are not given to arrogance,
83and when they listen to what has been sent down to the Messenger,
you will see their eyes over ﬂowing with tears because they recognize
the Truth [in it]. They say, ‘Our Lord, we believe, so count us amongst
the witnesses. 84Why should we not believe in God and in the Truth
that has come down to us, when we long for our Lord to include usin the company of the righteous?’ 85For saying this, God has rewarded
them with Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams, and there they
will stay: that is the reward of those who do good. 86Those who reject
the truth and deny Our messages will be the inhabitants of Hell ﬁre.
87You who believe, do not forbid the good things God has made
lawful to you– – do not exceed the limits: God does not love those who
exceed the limits– –88but eat the lawful and good things that God pro-
vides for you. Be mindful of God, in whom you believe. 89God does not
take you [to task] for what is thoughtless in your oaths,
b only for your
binding oaths: the atonement for breaking an oath is to feed ten poorpeople with food equivalent to what you would normally give your ownfamilies, or to clothe them, or to set free a slave– – if a person cannot ﬁnd
the means, he should fast for three days. This is the atonement forbreaking your oaths– – keep your oaths. In this way God makes clear
His revelations to you, so that you may be thankful.
90You who believe, intoxicants and gambling, idolatrous practices,
and [divining with]
c arrows are repugnant acts– – Satan’s doing– –
shun them so that you may prosper. 91With intoxicants and gam-
bling, Satan seeks only to incite enmity and hatred among you, andto stop you remembering God and prayer. Will you not give themup? 92Obey God, obey the Messenger, and always be on your guard:
if you pay no heed, bear in mind that the sole duty of Our Messengeris to deliver the message clearly. 93Those who believe and do good
deeds will not be blamed for what they may have consumed [in thepast]
d as long as they are mindful of God, believe and do good deeds,
aMost translators render these as ‘priests and monks’, which are their modern
meanings, not the etymological senses of the words (al-Raghib, Mufradat ).
bSome Muslims swore to renounce the world and not to eat certain good foods or
wear ﬁne clothes, and when told this was wrong, they asked the Prophet what they could
do about their oaths.
cSee note to verse 3 above.
dIt was reported that when wine was forbidden, some companions asked the Prophet,
‘What about those believers who used to drink and have already died? What state wouldthey be in?’ This is the reply to that question, and it also applies to the living.The Qur ᾿an 5:83 76then are mindful of God and believe, then are mindful of God and
do good deeds: God loves those who do good deeds.
94You who believe, God is sure to test you with game within reach
of your hands and spears, to ﬁnd out who fears Him even though
they cannot see Him: from now on, anyone who transgresses willhave a painful punishment.
a95You who believe, do not kill game
while you are in the state of consecration [for pilgrimage]. If some-one does so intentionally the penalty is an o ﬀering of a domestic
animal brought to the Ka ῾ba, equivalent– – as judged by two just men
among you– – to the one he has killed; alternatively, he may atone by
feeding the needy or by fasting an equivalent number of days, so thathe may taste the full gravity of his deed. God forgives what ispast, but if anyone re-o ﬀends, God will exact the penalty from him:
God is mighty, and capable of exacting the penalty. 96It is permitted
for you to catch and eat seafood– – an enjoyment for you and the
traveller– – but hunting game is forbidden while you are in the state
of consecration [for pilgrimage]. Be mindful of God to whom youwill be gathered.
97God has made the Ka ῾ba–– the Sacred House– – a means of
support for people,
b and the Sacred Months, the animals for sacri ﬁce
and their garlands: all this. Know that God has knowledge of all thatis in the heavens and earth and that He is fully aware of all things.98Know too that God is severe in punishment yet most forgiving and
merciful.
c99The Messenger’s duty is only to deliver the message:
God knows what you reveal and what you conceal.
100Say [Prophet], ‘Bad cannot be likened to good, though you may
be dazzled by how abundant the bad is. Be mindful of God, people ofunderstanding, so that you may prosper.’ 101You who believe, do not
ask about matters which, if made known to you, might make thingsdiﬃcult for you– – if you ask about them while the Qur ᾿an is being
revealed, they will be made known to you– – for God has kept silent
aIn the world to come.
bThe Ka ῾ba is the centre of the pilgrimage, bringing in people from all over the
world, where Muslims are allowed to trade– – the Sacred Months ensured their safety.
The o ﬀerings provide a means of livelihood to the poor and needy, and the custom of
garlanding an animal gives it special protection. In addition to all these material bene ﬁts,
there are the spiritual bene ﬁts of worshipping God. This is an example of bringing
people together in peace (Razi).
cThis is a warning for those who violate these rites and refers back to verse 2 of this
sura.The Feast 77 5:101about them: God is most forgiving and forbearing. 102Before you,
some people asked about things, then ignored [the answers]. 103God
did not institute the dedication of such things as bahira ,sa ᾿iba,
wasila , or hama to idols; but the disbelievers invent lies about God.
Most of them do not use reason: 104when it is said to them, ‘Come
to what God has sent down, and to the Messenger,’ they say, ‘Whatwe inherited from our forefathers is good enough for us,’ eventhough their forefathers knew nothing and were not guided. 105You
who believe, you are responsible for your own souls; if anyone elsegoes astray it will not harm you so long as you follow the guidance;you will all return to God, and He will make you realize what youhave done.
106You who believe, when death approaches any of you, let two
just men from among you act as witnesses to the making of abequest, or two men from another people if you are journeying in theland when death approaches. Keep the two witnesses back afterprayer, if you have any doubts, and make them both swear by God,‘We will not sell our testimony for any price, even if a close relative isinvolved. We will not hide God’s testimony, for then we should bedoing wrong.’ 107If it is discovered that these two are guilty [of per-
jury], two of those whose rights have been usurped have a better rightto bear witness in their place. Let them swear by God, ‘Our testi-
mony is truer than theirs. We have said nothing but the truth, for
that would make us wrongdoers’: 108that will make it more likely
they will give true and proper testimony, or fear that their oathsmight be refuted by others afterwards. Be mindful of God and listen;God does not guide those who break His laws.
109On the Day when God assembles all the messengers
b and asks,
‘What response did you receive?’ they will say, ‘We do not have that
knowledge: You alone know things that cannot be seen.’ 110Then
God will say, ‘Jesus, son of Mary! Remember My favour to you and
to your mother: how I strengthened you with the holy spirit, so that
aDiﬀerent classes of animals liberated from work or use as food, in honour of idols,
and venerated by the pagan Arabs.
bAs Razi rightly stated, it is the habit of the Qur ᾿an, having talked at length on
legislation, to follow it with reminders of God’s power, stories of earlier prophets, orwhat happens on the Day of Judgement, in order to motivate people to adhere to thelegislation. In this sura, having earlier mentioned the claims of Christians, it seeksfurther to refute them by showing that Jesus will disown their claims on the Day ofJudgement.The Qur ᾿an 5:102 78you spoke to people in your infancy and as a grown man; how I
taught you the Scripture and wisdom, the Torah and the Gospel;how, by My leave, you fashioned the shape of a bird out of clay,breathed into it, and it became, by My leave, a bird; how, by Myleave, you healed the blind person and the leper; how, by My leave,you brought the dead back to life; how I restrained the Children ofIsrael from [harming] you when you brought them clear signs, andthose of them who disbelieved said, “This is clearly nothing butsorcery”; 111and how I inspired the disciples to believe in Me and
My messengers– – they said, “We believe and bear witness that we
devote ourselves [to God].”’
a
112When the disciples said, ‘Jesus, son of Mary, can your Lord
send down a feast to us from heaven?’ he said, ‘Beware of God if you
are true believers.’ 113They said, ‘We wish to eat from it; to have our
hearts reassured; to know that you have told us the truth; and to bewitnesses of it.’ 114Jesus, son of Mary, said, ‘Lord, send down to us a
feast from heaven so that we can have a festival– – the ﬁrst and last of
us–– and a sign from You. Provide for us: You are the best provider.’
115God said, ‘I will send it down to you, but anyone who disbelieves
after this will be punished with a punishment that I will not in ﬂict on
anyone else in the world.’
116When God says, ‘Jesus, son of Mary, did you say to people,
“Take me and my mother as two gods alongside God”?’ he will say,‘May You be exalted! I would never say what I had no right to say– –
if I had said such a thing You would have known it: You know all thatis within me, though I do not know what is within You, You alonehave full knowledge of things unseen– –117I told them only what You
commanded me to: “Worship God, my Lord and your Lord.” I was awitness over them during my time among them. Ever since You tookmy soul, You alone have been the watcher over them: You are witnessto all things 118and if You punish them, they are Your servants; if You
forgive them, You are the Almighty, the Wise.’ 119God will say, ‘This
is a Day when the truthful will bene ﬁt from their truthfulness.
They will have Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams, there to
remain for ever. God is pleased with them and they with Him: that isthe supreme triumph.’ 120Control of the heavens and earth and
everything in them belongs to God: He has power over all things.
aCf. 2:131–3.The Feast 79 5:1206. LIVESTOCK
A Meccan sura which takes its title from verses 136–9. The false claims the
polytheists made about livestock are thoroughly addressed: the sura in itsentirety makes plain that it is God who creates, controls, and sees everything,and that it is to Him that we turn in times of need. Thus it gives a lengthyrefutation of the idolaters’ claims.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Praise belongs to God who created the heavens and the earth and
made darkness and light; yet the disbelievers set up equals to their
Lord! 2He is the one who created you from clay and speci ﬁed a term
[for you] and another ﬁxed time,a known only to Him; yet still you
doubt! 3He is God in the heavens and on earth, He knows your
secrets and what you reveal, and He knows what you do; 4but every
time revelation comes to them from their Lord, they turn their backson it. 5So they denied the truth when it came to them, but the very
thing they laughed at will be brought home to them.
6Do they not realize how many generations We destroyed before
them? We established them in the earth more ﬁrmly than you, sent
down abundant rain on them from the sky and made running riversﬂow at their feet, yet We destroyed them for their misdeeds and
raised other generations after them. 7Even if We had sent down to
you [Prophet] a book inscribed on parchment, and they had touchedit with their own hands, the disbelievers would still say, ‘This isnothing but blatant sorcery.’ 8They say, ‘Why was no angel sent
down to [support] him?’
b But had We sent down an angel, their
judgement would have come at once with no respite given. 9Indeed,
if We had sent an angel as messenger, We would still have sent him inthe form of a man, so increasing their confusion.
10Messengers have been mocked before you [Muhammad], and
those who mocked them were engulfed by the very punishment theyhad mocked. 11Say, ‘Travel throughout the earth and see what fate
aThese refer to the speci ﬁed lifetime of individuals and the Day of Judgement.
bThey always argued against the Prophet that he was only a man, and asked him to
produce an angel to support him. Cf. 25:7.befell those who rejected the truth.’ 12Say, ‘To whom belongs all that
is in the heavens and earth?’ Say, ‘To God. He has taken it uponHimself to be merciful. He will certainly gather you on the Day ofResurrection, which is beyond all doubt. Those who deceive them-selves will not believe. 13All that rests by night or by day belongs to
Him. He is the All Hearing, the All Knowing.’ 14Say, ‘Shall I take for
myself a protector other than God, the Creator of the heavens and
the earth, who feeds but is not fed?’ Say, ‘I am commanded to be theﬁrst [of you] to devote myself [to Him].’ Do not be one of the
idolaters. 15Say, ‘I fear the punishment of a dreadful Day if I
disobey my Lord. 16God will have been truly merciful to whoever is
spared on that Day: that is the clearest triumph.’
17If God touches you [Prophet] with a ﬄiction, no one can remove
it except Him, and if He touches you with good, He has power overall things: 18He is the Supreme Master over His creatures, the All
Wise, the All Aware. 19Say, ‘What counts most as a witness?’ Say,
‘God is witness between you and me. This Qur ᾿an was revealed for
me to warn you [people] and everyone it reaches. Do you really bearwitness that there are other gods beside God?’ Say, ‘I myself do notbear witness [to any such thing].’ Say, ‘He is only one God, and Idisown whatever you join with Him.’ 20Those to whom We have
given the Scripture know this as well as they know their own sons.
Those who have lost their souls will not believe. 21Who does greater
wrong than someone who fabricates a lie against God or denies Hisrevelation? Those who do such wrong will not prosper. 22When We
gather them all together and say to the polytheists, ‘Where are thoseyou claimed were partners with God?’ in their utter dismay 23they
will only say, ‘By God, our Lord, we have not set up partners besideHim!’ 24See how they lie against themselves and how those they
invented have deserted them.
25Among them are some who [appear to] listen to you, but we have
placed covers over their hearts– – so they do not understand the
Qur ᾿an–– and deafness in their ears. Even if they saw every sign they
would not believe in them. So, when they come to you, they argue
with you: the disbelievers say, ‘These are nothing but ancient fables,’
26and tell others not to listen [to the Qur ᾿an], while they themselves
keep away from it. But they ruin no one but themselves, thoughthey fail to realize this. 27If you could only see, when they are made
to stand before the Fire, how they will say, ‘If only we could beLivestock
81 6:27sent back, we would not reject the revelations of our Lord, but be
among the believers.’ 28No! The truth they used to hide will become all
too clear to them. Even if they were brought back, they would onlyreturn to the very thing that was forbidden to them– – they are such
liars! 29They say, ‘There is nothing beyond our life in this world: we
shall not be raised from the dead.’ 30If you could only see, when they
are made to stand before their Lord, how He will say, ‘Is this notreal?’ They will say, ‘Yes indeed, by our Lord.’ He will say, ‘Thentaste the torment for having disbelieved.’ 31Lost indeed are those
who deny the meeting with their Lord until, when the Hour sud-denly arrives, they say, ‘Alas for us that we disregarded this!’ Theywill bear their burdens on their backs. How terrible those burdenswill be! 32The life of this world is nothing but a game and a distrac-
tion; the Home in the Hereafter is best for those who are aware ofGod. Why will you [people] not understand?
33We know well that what they say grieves you [Prophet]. It is not
you they disbelieve: the evildoers reject God’s revelation. 34Other
messengers were disbelieved before you, and they bore their rejec-tion and persecution steadfastly until Our aid arrived– – no one can
alter God’s promises. You have already received accounts of these
messengers. 35If you ﬁnd rejection by the disbelievers so hard to
bear, then seek a tunnel into the ground or a ladder into the sky,if you can, and bring them a sign: God could bring them all toguidance if it were His will, so do not join the ignorant. 36Only those
who can hear will respond; as for the dead, God will raise them up,and to Him they will all be returned.
37They also say, ‘Why has no sign been sent down to him from his
Lord?’ Say, ‘God certainly has the power to send down a sign,’though most of them do not know: 38all the creatures that crawl on
the earth and those that ﬂy with their wings are communities like
yourselves. We have missed nothing out of the Record– – in the end
they will be gathered to their Lord. 39Those who reject Our signs are
deaf, dumb, and in total darkness. God leaves whoever He will tostray, and sets whoever He will on a straight path. 40Say, ‘Think: if
the punishment of God or the Hour should come to you, would youcall on anyone other than God, if you are being truthful?’ 41No
indeed, it is on Him that you would call. If it were His will, He couldremove whatever harm made you call on Him, and then you wouldforget what you now associate with Him.The Qur ᾿an 6:28 8242We sent messengers before you [Prophet] to many communities
and a ﬄicted their people with su ﬀering and hardships, so that they
could learn humility. 43If only they had learned humility when
suﬀering came from Us! But no, their hearts became hard and
Satan made their foul deeds alluring to them. 44So, when they had
forgotten the warning they had received, We opened the gates toeverything for them. Then, as they revelled in what they hadbeen given, We struck them suddenly and they were dumbfounded.45The evildoers were wiped out: praise be to God, the Lord of the
Worlds!
46Say [Prophet], ‘Think: if God were to take away your hearing and
your sight and seal up your hearts, what god other than He couldrestore them?’ See how We explain Our revelations in various ways,yet still they turn away. 47Say, ‘Think: if the punishment of God
should come to you, by surprise or openly, would anyone but theevildoers be destroyed?’ 48We send messengers only to give good news
and to warn, so for those who believe and do good deeds there will beno fear, nor will they grieve. 49As for those who rejected Our signs,
torment will a ﬄict them as a result of their de ﬁance. 50Say, ‘I do not
have the treasures of God, nor do I know the unseen, nor do I tell you
that I am an angel. I only follow what is revealed to me.’ Say, ‘Is a blindperson like one who can see? Why will you not re ﬂect?’
51Use the Qur ᾿an to warn those who fear being gathered before
their Lord– – they will have no one but Him to protect them and no
one to intercede– – so that they may beware. 52Do not drive away
those who call upon their Lord morning and evening, seeking noth-
ing but His Face.
a You are in no way accountable for them, nor they
for you; if you drove the believers away,b you would become one of
the evildoers. 53We have made some of them a test for others, to
make the disbelievers say, ‘Is it these men that God has favoured
among us?’ Does God not know best who are the grateful ones?
54When those who believe in Our revelations come to you
[Prophet], say, ‘Peace be upon you. Your Lord has taken it on
a‘His pleasure/approval’, or ‘to see His face’ (see ‘The Face, Divine and Human in
the Qur ᾿an’, in Abdel Haleem, Understanding the Qur ᾿an,107–22); see also 92:19–21.
bCf. 80:1. The Prophet was torn between his e ﬀorts to win over the nobles to save
them, and the humble believers, whom the nobles wanted him to get rid of, claiming thatthey only congregated around him to gain prestige or material bene ﬁts. The Prophet
here is told that he should not worry about them and so become a wrongdoer by drivingaway true believers.Livestock 83 6:54Himself to be merciful: if any of you has foolishly done a bad
deed, and afterwards repented and mended his ways, God is mostforgiving and most merciful.’ 55In this way We explain the revela-
tions, so that the way for sinners may be made clear.
a56Say, ‘I am
forbidden to worship those you call on other than God.’ Say, ‘I willnot follow your vain desires, for if I did, I would stray from the pathand cease to be rightly guided.’ 57Say, ‘I stand on clear proof from
my Lord, though you deny it. What you seek to hasten is not withinmy power. Judgement is for God alone: He tells the truth, and He isthe best of judges.’ 58Say, ‘If what you seek to hasten were within my
power, the matter would be settled between you and me, but God
knows best who does wrong.’ 59He has the keys to the unseen: no one
knows them but Him. He knows all that is in the land and sea. Noleaf falls without His knowledge, nor is there a single grain in thedarkness of the earth, or anything, fresh or withered, that is notwritten in a clear Record. 60It is He who calls your souls back by
night, knowing what you have done by day, then raises you up again
in the daytime until your ﬁxed term is ful ﬁlled. It is to Him that you
will return in the end, and He will tell you what you have done. 61He
is the Supreme Master over His subjects. He sends out recorders towatch over you until, when death overtakes any of you, those sent byUs take his soul– – they never fail in their duty. 62Then they will all be
returned to God, their true Lord. The Judgement truly belongs to
Him, and He is the swiftest of reckoners.
63Say [Prophet], ‘Who is it that saves you from the dark depths of
land and sea when you humbly and secretly call to Him [and say], “IfHe rescues us from this, We shall truly be thankful”?’ 64Say, ‘God
rescues you from this and every distress; yet still you worship othersbeside Him.’ 65Say, ‘He has power to send punishment on you from
above or from under your very feet, or to divide you into discordantfactions and make some taste the violence of others.’ See how Weexplain Our revelation in various ways, so that they may understand,66yet your people still reject it even though it is the truth. Say, ‘I have
not been put in charge of you. 67Every prophecy has its ﬁxed time to
be ful ﬁlled: you will come to realize this.’
68When you come across people who speak with scorn about Our
aAnother interpretation of this verse is that the way of the sinners is hereby made
distinct from the way of the righteous.The Qur ᾿an 6:55 84revelations, turn away from them until they move on to another
topic. If Satan should make you forget, then, when you have remem-bered, do not sit with those who are doing wrong. 69The righteous
are not in any way held accountable for the wrongdoers; their onlyduty is to remind them, so that they may be mindful of God. 70Leave
to themselves those who take their religion for a mere game anddistraction and are deceived by the life of this world, but continue toremind them with the [Qur ᾿an], lest any soul be damned by what it
has done– – it will have no one to protect it from God and no one to
intercede; whatever ransom it may o ﬀer will not be accepted. Such
are those who are damned by their own actions: they will have boil-ing water to drink and a painful punishment, because they used to
defy [God].
71Say, ‘Instead of God, are we to call on what neither pro ﬁts nor
harms us? [Are we to] turn on our heels after God has guided us, likesomeone bewildered, having been tempted by devils into a desertravine,
a though his companions call him to guidance [saying], “Come
to us”?’ Say, ‘God’s guidance is the true guidance. We are commandedto devote ourselves to the Lord of the Worlds, 72to establish regular
prayers and be mindful of Him.’ It is to Him that you will all begathered. 73It is He who created the heavens and the earth for a true
purpose. On the Day when He says, ‘Be,’ it will be: His word is thetruth. All control on the Day the Trumpet is blown belongs to Him.He knows the seen and the unseen: He is the All Wise, the All Aware.
74Remember when Abraham said to his father, Azar, ‘How can you
take idols as gods? I see that you and your people have clearly goneastray.’ 75In this way We showed Abraham [God’s] mighty dominion
over the heavens and the earth, so that he might be a ﬁrm believer.
76When the night grew dark over him he saw a star and said, ‘This is
my Lord,’ but when it set, he said, ‘I do not like things that set.’
77And when he saw the moon rising he said, ‘ This is my Lord,’ but
when it too set, he said, ‘If my Lord does not guide me, I shall be
one of those who go astray.’ 78Then he saw the sun rising and cried,
‘This is my Lord! This is greater.’ But when the sun set, he said,
‘My people, I disown all that you worship beside God. 79I have
turned my face as a true believer towards Him who created theheavens and the earth. I am not one of the polytheists.’
aThis interpretation of the literal ‘in the land’ is preferred by Razi.Livestock 85 6:7980His people argued with him, and he said, ‘How can you argue
with me about God when He has guided me? I do not fear anythingyou associate with Him: unless my Lord wills [nothing can happen].My Lord encompasses everything in His knowledge. How can younot take heed? 81Why should I fear what you associate with Him?
Why do you not fear to associate with Him things for which He hassent you no authority? Tell me, if you know the answer, which sidehas more right to feel secure? 82It is those who have faith, and do not
mix their faith with idolatry,
a who will be secure, and it is they who
are rightly guided.’ 83Such was the argument We gave to Abraham
against his people– – We raise in rank whoever We will– – your Lord is
all wise, all knowing.
84We gave him Isaac and Jacob, each of whom We guided, as We
had guided Noah before, and among his descendants were David,Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron– – in this way We reward
those who do good– –85Zachariah, John, Jesus, and Elijah– – every
one of them was righteous– –86Ishmael, Elisha, Jonah, and Lot. We
favoured each one of them over other people, 87and also some of
their forefathers, their o ﬀspring, and their brothers: We chose them
and guided them on a straight path. 88Such is God’s guidance, with
which He guides whichever of His servants He will. If they hadassociated other gods with Him, all their deeds would have come tonothing. 89Those are the ones to whom We gave the Scripture, wis-
dom, and prophethood. Even if these people now disbelieve in them,We have entrusted them to others who do not disbelieve. 90Those
were the people God guided, ‘[Prophet], follow the guidance theyreceived.’ Say, ‘I ask no reward for it from you: it is a lesson for allpeople.’
91They have no grasp of God’s true measure when they say, ‘God
has sent nothing down to a mere mortal.’ Say, ‘Who was it who sentdown the Scripture, which Moses brought as a light and a guide topeople, which you made into separate sheets, showing some buthiding many? You were taught things that neither you nor yourforefathers had known.’ Say, ‘God [sent it down],’ then leave themengrossed in their vain talk. 92This is a blessed Scripture that We
have sent down to con ﬁrm what came before it and for you to warn
aThe Prophet explained zulm  (evildoing) here to be shirk  (idolatry), referring to
31:13.The Qur ᾿an 6:80 86the Mother of Citiesa and all around it. Those who believe in the
Hereafter believe in this Scripture, and do not neglect their prayers.93Who could be more wicked than someone who invents a lie
against God, or claims, ‘A revelation has come to me,’ when norevelation has been sent to him, or says, ‘I too can reveal somethingequal to God’s revelation’? If you could only see the wicked in theirdeath agonies, as the angels stretch out their hands [to them],saying, ‘Give up your souls. Today you will be repaid with ahumiliating punishment for saying false things about God andfor arrogantly rejecting His revelations.’ 94[God will say], ‘Now
you return to Us, alone, as We ﬁrst created you: you have left
behind everything We gave you, nor do We see those intercessors
of yours that you claimed were partners of God. All the bonds
between you have been severed, and those about whom you madesuch claims have deserted you.’
95It is God who splits open the seed and the fruit stone: He brings
out the living from the dead and the dead from the living– – that is
God– – so how can you turn away from the truth? 96He makes the
dawn break; He makes the night for rest; and He made the sun andthe moon to a precise measure. That is the design of the Almighty,the All Knowing. 97It is He who made the stars, so that they can
guide you when land and sea are dark: We have made the signs clear
for those who have knowledge. 98It is He who ﬁrst produced you
from a single soul, then gave you a place to stay [in life] and a restingplace [after death]. We have made Our revelations clear to those whounderstand. 99It is He who sends down water from the sky. With it
We produce the shoots of each plant, then bring greenery fromit, and from that We bring out grains, one riding on the other inclose-packed rows.
From the date palm come clusters of low-hanging dates, and there
are gardens of vines, olives, and pomegranates, alike yet di ﬀerent.
Watch their fruits as they grow and ripen! In all this there are signsfor those who would believe. 100Yet they made the jinn
b partners
with God, though He created them, and without any true knowledgethey attribute sons and daughters to Him. Glory be to Him! He is far
aMecca.
bUnseen beings (sometimes said to appear) made from ‘smokeless ﬁre’ (see 38:76;
55:15).Livestock 87 6:100higher than what they ascribe to Him, 101the Creator of the heavens
and earth! How could He have children when He has no spouse,when He created all things, and has full knowledge of all things?102This is God, your Lord, there is no God but Him, the Creator of
all things, so worship Him; He is in charge of everything. 103No
vision can take Him in, but He takes in all vision.
a He is the All
Subtle, the All Aware.
104Now clear proof has come to you from your Lord: if anyone
sees it, that will be to his advantage; if anyone is blind to it, that willbe to his loss– – [Say], ‘I am not your guardian.’ 105This is how We
explain Our revelations in various ways– – though
b they will say,
‘You [Muhammad] have been studying’– – to make them clear for
those who know. 106Follow what has been revealed to you from your
Lord, there is no God but Him. Turn away from those who join
other gods with Him. 107If it had been God’s will, they would not
have done so, but We have not made you their guardian, nor are youtheir keeper.
108[Believers], do not revile those they call on beside God in case
they, in their hostility and ignorance, revile God. To each com-munity We make their own actions seem alluring, but in the end theywill return to their Lord and He will inform them of all they did.109They swear by God with their most solemn oaths that if a miracu-
lous sign came to them they would believe in it. Say [Prophet],‘Signs are in the power of God alone.’ What will make you[believers] realize that even if a sign came to them they still wouldnot believe? 110We would make their hearts and their eyes turn away,
just as they did not believe the ﬁrst time, and leave them to ﬂounder
in their obstinacy. 111Even if We sent the angels down to them, and
the dead spoke to them, and We gathered all things right in front ofthem, they still would not believe, unless God so willed, but most ofthem are ignorant [of this]. 112In the same way We assigned to each
prophet an enemy, evil humans and evil jinn. They suggest alluringwords to one another in order to deceive– – if it had been your Lord’s
will, [Prophet], they would not have done this: leave them to their
inventions– –113so that the hearts of those who do not believe in the
aNo human eye is able to see God, but God sees everything we see: this is another
illustration of our powerlessness compared with Him.
bSee Razi; the preposition li in Arabic here indicates result rather than purpose.The Qur ᾿an 6:101 88Hereafter may incline towards their deceit, be pleased with it, and so
perpetrate whatever they perpetrate.
114[Say], ‘Shall I seek any judge other than God, when it is He
who has sent down for you [people] the Scripture, clearlyexplained?’ Those to whom We gave the Scripture know that this[Qur ᾿an] is revealed by your Lord [Prophet] with the truth, so do not
be one of those who doubt. 115The word of your Lord is complete in
its truth and justice. No one can change His words: He is the All
Hearing, the All Knowing. 116If you obeyed most of those on earth,
they would lead you away from the path of God. They follow noth-ing but speculation; they are merely guessing. 117Your Lord knows
best who strays from His path and who is rightly guided.
118So [believers] eat any [animal] over which God’s name has been
pronounced, if you believe in His revelations. 119Why should you
not eat such animals when God has already fully explained what Hehas forbidden you, except when forced by hunger? But many leadothers astray by their desires, without any true knowledge: yourLord knows best who oversteps the limit. 120Avoid committing sin,
whether openly or in secret, for those who commit sin will be repaidfor what they do, 121and do not eat anything over which God’s name
has not been pronounced, for that is breaking the law.
The evil ones incite their followers to argue with you:
a if you
listen to them, you too will become idolaters. 122Is a dead person
brought back to life by Us, and given light with which to walk amongpeople, comparable to someone trapped in deep darkness who cannotescape? In this way the evil deeds of the disbelievers are madeto seem alluring to them. 123And so We have put chief evildoers in
every city to perpetrate their schemes there– – but they scheme only
against themselves, without realizing it. 124When a revelation is
brought before them they say, ‘We shall not believe unless we our-selves are given a revelation as God’s messengers were.’ But Godknows best where to place His messages: humiliation before God andsevere torment will befall the evildoers for their scheming. 125When
God wishes to guide someone, He opens their breast to islam ;
b when
He wishes to lead them astray, He closes and constricts their breastas if they were climbing up to the skies. That is how God makes thefoulness of those who do not believe rebound against them.
aSaying that nothing is wrong with meat sacri ﬁced to an idol.
bDevotion to God (see 2:131–2).Livestock 89 6:125126[Prophet], this is the path of your Lord, made perfectly
straight. We have explained Our revelations to those who take heed.127They shall have the Home of Peace with their Lord, and He will
take care of them as a reward for their deeds.
128On the day He gathers everyone together [saying], ‘Company
of jinn! You have seduced a great many humans,’ their adherentsamong mankind will say, ‘Lord, we have pro ﬁted from one another,
but now we have reached the appointed time You decreed for us.’He will say, ‘Your home is the Fire, and there you shall remain’– –
unless God wills otherwise: [Prophet], your Lord is all wise, all
knowing. 129In this way, We make some evildoers have power over
others through their misdeeds. 130‘Company of jinn and mankind!
Did messengers not come from among you to recite My revelations
to you and warn that you would meet this Day?’ They will say, ‘Wetestify against ourselves.’ The life of this world seduced them, butthey will testify against themselves that they rejected the truth:131your Lord would not destroy towns for their wrongdoing if they
had not been warned. 132Everyone is assigned a rank according to
their deeds; your Lord is not unaware of anything they do. 133Your
Lord is self-su ﬃcient and full of mercy. If He pleased, He could
remove you and put others in your place, just as He produced you
from the o ﬀspring of other people. 134What you are promised is sure
to come, and you cannot escape. 135[Prophet], say, ‘My people, you
carry on as you are, and so will I: you will come to realize who willhave a happy homecoming in the Hereafter.’ The evildoers will notprosper.
136They apportion to God a share of the produce and the livestock
He created, saying, ‘This is for God’– – so they claim!– – ‘ and this is
for our idols.’ Their idols’ share does not reach God, but God’s sharedoes reach their idols: how badly they judge! 137In the same way,
their idols have induced many of the pagans to kill their own chil-dren,
a bringing them ruin and confusion in their faith: if God had
willed otherwise they would not have done this, so [Prophet] leavethem to their own devices. 138They also say, ‘These cattle and crops
are reserved, and only those we allow may eat them’– – so they claim!
There are some animals they exempt from labour and some over
aRazi explains that either the jinn or servants of the idols appointed by the pagans
suggested this infanticide.The Qur ᾿an 6:126 90which they do not pronounce God’s name [during slaughter], falsely
attributing these [regulations] to Him: He will repay them for thefalsehoods they invent. 139They also say, ‘The contents of these ani-
mals’ wombs will be reserved solely for our men and forbidden toour women, though if the o ﬀspring is stillborn they may have a share
of it.’ He will punish them for what they attribute to Him: He is allwise, all aware. 140Lost indeed are those who kill their own children
out of folly, with no basis in knowledge,
a forbidding what God has
provided for them, fabricating lies against Him: they have gone far
astray and have heeded no guidance.
141It is He who produces both trellised and untrellised gardens,
date palms, crops of diverse ﬂavours, the olive, the pomegranate,
alike yet di ﬀerent. So when they bear fruit, eat some of it, paying
what is due on the day of harvest, but do not be wasteful: God doesnot like wasteful people. 142[He gave you] livestock, as beasts of
burden and as food. So eat what God has provided for you and donot follow in Satan’s footsteps: he is your sworn enemy. 143[God gave
you] eight animals, in [four] pairs: a pair of sheep and a pair ofgoats– – ask them [Prophet], ‘Has He forbidden the two males, the
two females, or the young in the wombs of the two females? Tell mebased on knowledge if you are telling the truth.’ 144And a pair of
camels and a pair of cattle– – ask them [Prophet], ‘Has He forbidden
the two males, the two females, or the young in the wombs of the twofemales? Were you present when God gave you these commands?’ Sowho is more wicked than he who fabricates lies against God with nobasis in knowledge in order to lead people astray? God does notguide the evildoers.
145[Prophet], say, ‘In all that has been revealed to me, I ﬁnd noth-
ing forbidden for people to eat, except for carrion, ﬂowing blood,
pig’s meat– – it is loathsome– – or a sinful o ﬀering over which any
name other than God’s has been invoked.’ But if someone is forcedby hunger, rather than desire or excess, then God is most forgivingand most merciful. 146We forbade for the Jews every animal with
claws, and the fat of cattle and sheep, except what is on their backsand in their intestines, or that which sticks to their bones. This is
how We penalized them for their disobedience: We are true to Our
word. 147If they [the disbelievers] accuse you [Prophet] of lying, say,
ai.e. scriptural evidence, cf. verses 143,144, and 148.Livestock 91 6:147‘Your Lord has all-encompassing mercy, but His punishment cannot
be diverted from the evildoers.’ 148The idolaters will say, ‘If God had
willed, we would not have ascribed partners to Him– – nor would our
fathers– – or have declared anything forbidden.’ In the same way,
those before them continually denied [the truth] until they tastedOur punishment. Say, ‘Have you any knowledge that you can showus? You follow only supposition and tell only lies.’ 149Say, ‘The con-
clusive argument belongs to God alone. Had He so willed He would
have guided you all.’ 150Say, ‘Bring your witnesses to testify that God
has forbidden all this.’ If they do testify, do not bear witness withthem. Do not follow the whims of those who have denied Our revela-tion, who do not believe in the Hereafter, and who set up equals withtheir Lord.
151Say, ‘Come! I will tell you what your Lord has really forbidden
you. Do not ascribe anything as a partner to Him; be good to yourparents; do not kill your children in fear of poverty’– – We will
provide for you and for them– – ‘ stay well away from committing
obscenities, whether openly or in secret; do not take the life God hasmade sacred, except by right. This is what He commands you to do:perhaps you will use your reason. 152Stay well away from the prop-
erty of orphans, except with the best [intentions], until they come ofage; give full measure and weight, according to justice’– – We do not
burden any soul with more than it can bear– – ‘ when you speak, be
just, even if it concerns a relative; keep any promises you make inGod’s name. This is what He commands you to do, so that you maytake heed’– –153this is My path, leading straight, so follow it, and do
not follow other ways: they will lead you away from it– – ‘ This is what
He commands you to do, so that you may refrain from wrongdoing.’
154Once again,
a We gave Moses the Scripture, perfecting [Our
favour] for those who do good, explaining everything clearly, as
guidance and mercy, so that they might believe in the meeting withtheir Lord. 155This, too, is a blessed Scripture which We have sent
down– – follow it and be conscious of your Lord, so that you may
receive mercy– –156lest you say, ‘Scriptures were only sent down to
two communities before us: we were not aware of what they studied,’
157or ‘If only the Scripture had been sent down to us, we would have
aThis reiterates the statement in verses 91–3 in response to their denial that God has
ever sent down any revelation.The Qur ᾿an 6:148 92been better guided than them.’ Now clear evidence, guidance, and
mercy have come to you from your Lord. Who could be more wrongthan someone who rejects God’s revelations and turns away fromthem? We shall repay those who turn away with a painful punish-ment. 158Are they waiting for the very angels to come to them, or
your Lord Himself, or maybe some of His signs? But on the Daysome of your Lord’s signs
a come, no soul will pro ﬁt from faith if it
had none before, or has not already earned some good through itsfaith. Say, ‘Wait if you wish: we too are waiting.’
159As for those who have divided their religion and broken up into
factions, have nothing to do with them [Prophet]. Their case restswith God: in time He will tell them about their deeds. 160Whoever
has done
b a good deed will have it ten times to his credit, but who-
ever has done a bad deed will be repaid only with its equivalent– –
they will not be wronged. 161Say, ‘My Lord has guided me to a
straight path, an upright religion, the faith of Abraham, a man ofpure faith. He was not a polytheist.’ 162Say, ‘My prayers and sacri-
ﬁce, my life and death, are all for God, Lord of all the Worlds; 163He
has no partner. This is what I am commanded, and I am the ﬁrst
c to
devote myself to Him.’ 164Say, ‘Should I seek a Lord other than God,
when He is the Lord of all things?’ Each soul is responsible for itsown actions; no soul will bear the burden of another. You will allreturn to your Lord in the end, and He will tell you the truth aboutyour di ﬀerences. 165It is He who made you successors
d on the earth
and raises some of you above others in rank, to test you through whatHe gives you. [Prophet], your Lord is swift in punishment, yet He ismost forgiving and merciful.
aSigns of the Day of Judgement.
bLit. Whoever brings , i.e. to the Judgement.
cThe ﬁrst ‘of you’: cf. verse 14 and many others.
dSee note a to 2:30.Livestock 93 6:1657. THE HEIGHTS
A Meccan sura named after the heights of the barrier which will divide the
righteous from the damned on the Day of Judgement (verse 46). The sura
begins by addressing the Prophet, reassuring him about his revelations, andcloses emphasizing the fact that he merely repeats what is revealed to him. Itwarns the disbelievers of their fate via numerous stories of disobedient com-munities of the past, in the hope that they may take heed and repent before it istoo late. Both subjects also serve to give encouragement to the Prophet and thebelievers.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Alif Lam Mim Sad
2This Book has been sent down to you [Prophet]– –let there be no
anxiety in your heart because of ita– –so that you may use it to give
warning and to remind the believers: 3‘Follow what has been sent
down to you from your Lord; do not follow other masters besideHim. How seldom you take heed!’
4How many towns We have destroyed! Our punishment came to
them by night or while they slept in the afternoon: 5their only cry
when Our punishment came to them was, ‘How wrong we were!’6We shall certainly question those to whom messengers were sent– –
and We shall question the messengers themselves– – 7and, with full
knowledge, for We were never far from them, We shall tell them
what they did. 8On that Day the weighing of deeds will be true and
just: those whose good deeds are heavy on the scales will be the onesto prosper, 9and those whose good deeds are light will be the ones
who have lost their souls through their wrongful rejection of Our
messages.
10We established you [people] on the earth and provided you with a
means of livelihood there– –small thanks you give! 11We created you,
We gave you shape, and then We said to the angels, ‘Bow down beforeAdam,’ and they did. But not Iblis: he was not one of those who bowed
aSee6:33–6;20:2.down. 12God said, ‘What prevented you from bowing down as I com-
manded you?’ and he said, ‘I am better than him: You created me fromﬁre and him from clay.’ 13God said, ‘Get down from here! This
a is no
place for your arrogance. Get out! You are contemptible!’ 14but Iblis
said, ‘Give me respite until the Day people are raised from the dead,’15and God replied, ‘You have respite.’ 16And then Iblis said, ‘Because
You have put me in the wrong, I will lie in wait for them all on Yourstraight path: 17I will come at them– – from their front and their back,
from their right and their left– – and You will ﬁnd that most of them are
ungrateful.’ 18God said, ‘Get out! You are disgraced and banished! I
swear I shall ﬁll Hell with you and all who follow you! 19But you and
your wife, Adam, live in the Garden. Both of you eat whatever youlike, but do not go near this tree or you will become wrongdoers.’
20Satan whispered to them so as to expose their nakedness,
b which
had been hidden from them: he said, ‘Your Lord only forbade youthis tree to prevent you becoming angels or immortals,’ 21and he
swore to them, ‘I am giving you sincere advice’– –22he lured them
with lies. Their nakedness became exposed to them when they hadeaten from the tree: they began to put together leaves from the Gar-den to cover themselves. Their Lord called to them, ‘Did I not forbidyou to approach that tree? Did I not warn you that Satan was yoursworn enemy?’ 23They replied, ‘Our Lord, we have wronged our
souls: if You do not forgive us and have mercy, we shall be lost.’ 24He
said, ‘All of you get out! You are each other’s enemies.
c On earth you
will have a place to stay and livelihood– – for a time.’ 25He said, ‘There
you will live; there you will die; from there you will be brought out.’
26Children of Adam, We have given you garments to cover
your nakedness and as adornment for you; the garment of God-consciousness is the best of all garments– – this is one of God’s signs,
so that people may take heed. 27Children of Adam, do not let Satan
seduce you, as he did your parents, causing them to leave the Gar-den, stripping them of their garments
d to expose their nakedness to
them: he and his forces can see you from where you cannot seethem: We have made evil ones allies to those who do not believe.
aThe Garden, cf. 20:117.
bConventionally translated as ‘private parts’, but the Arabic does not necessarily
have this meaning.
cIblis is the enemy of mankind and vice versa.
dOf God-consciousness. This is one of the views reported by Razi.The Heights 95 7:2728Yet when [these people] do something disgraceful,a they say,
‘We found our forefathers doing this,’ and, ‘God has commanded usto do this.’ Say [Prophet], ‘God does not command disgracefuldeeds. How can you say about God things that you do not know [tobe true]?’ 29Say, ‘My Lord commands righteousness. Direct your
worship straight to Him wherever you pray; call on Him; devoteyour religion entirely to Him. Just as He ﬁrst created you, so you
will come back [to life] again.’ 30Some He has guided and some are
doomed to stray: they have taken evil ones rather than God as their
masters, thinking that they are rightly guided. 31Children of Adam,
dress well
b whenever you are at worship, and eat and drink [as We
have permitted] but do not be extravagant: God does not likeextravagant people. 32Say [Prophet], ‘Who has forbidden the
adornment and the nourishment God has provided for His ser-vants?’ Say, ‘They are [allowed] for those who believe during the lifeof this world: they will be theirs alone on the Day of Resurrection.’This is how We make Our revelation clear for those whounderstand.
33Say [Prophet], ‘My Lord only forbids disgraceful deeds– –
whether they be open or hidden– – and sin
c and unjusti ﬁed aggres-
sion, and that you, without His sanction, associate things with Him,and that you say things about Him without knowledge.’
d34There is a
time set for every people: they cannot hasten it, nor, when it comes,will they be able to delay it for a single moment.
35Children of Adam, when messengers come to you from among
yourselves, reciting My revelations to you, for those who are con-scious of God and live righteously, there will be no fear, nor will theygrieve. 36But those who reject Our revelations and arrogantly scorn
them are the people of the Fire and there they will remain. 37Who is
more wrong than the person who invents lies against God or rejectsHis revelations? Such people will have their preordained share [in
this world], but then, when Our angels arrive to take them back,
aIt has been suggested that this could refer to the pagan custom of men and women
walking round the Ka ῾ba naked (Razi).
bLiterally ‘wear your adornment’, but this is clearly a reference to clothes and not to
jewellery; cf. 7:26. See also references to food in 6:135,145,148.
cRazi identi ﬁes this as intoxicants because of their link with ‘sin’ in 2:219 and the
preceding verse about food.
dRevealed knowledge, cf. 6:148.The Qur ᾿an 7:28 96saying, ‘Where are those you used to call on beside God?’ they will
say, ‘They have deserted us.’ They will confess that they were dis-believers and 38God will say, ‘Join the crowds of jinn and humans
who have gone before you into the Fire.’ Every crowd curses itsfellow crowd as it enters, then, when they are all gathered inside, thelast of them will say of the ﬁrst, ‘Our Lord, it was they who led us
astray: give them double punishment in the Fire’– – God says, ‘Every
one of you will have double punishment, though you do not knowit’––39and the ﬁrst of them will say to the last, ‘You were no better
than us: taste the punishment you have earned.’
40The gates of Heaven will not be open to those who rejected Our
revelations and arrogantly spurned them; even if a thick rope
a were
to pass through the eye of a needle they would not enter the Garden.This is how We punish the guilty– –41Hell will be their resting place
and their covering, layer upon layer– – this is how We punish those
who do evil. 42But those who believe and do good deeds– – and We
do not burden any soul with more than it can bear– – are the people
of the Garden and there they will remain. 43We shall have removed
all ill feeling from their hearts; streams will ﬂow at their feet. They
will say, ‘Praise be to God, who guided us to this: had God notguided us, We would never have found the way. The messengers ofour Lord brought the Truth.’ A voice will call out to them, ‘This isthe Garden you have been given as your own on account of yourdeeds.’ 44The people of the Garden will cry out to the people of the
Fire, ‘We have found what our Lord promised us to be true. Haveyou found what your Lord promised you to be true?’ and they willanswer, ‘Yes’. A voice will proclaim from their midst, ‘God’s rejec-tion [hangs] over the evildoers: 45those who turned others away
from God’s path and tried to make it crooked, those who denied theHereafter.’
46A barrier divides the two groups with men on its heights
recognizing each group by their marks: they will call out to thepeople of the Garden, ‘Peace be with you!’– – they will not have
entered, but they will be hoping, 47and when their glance falls upon
the people of the Fire, they will say, ‘Our Lord, do not let us join theevildoers!’– –48and the people of the heights will call out to certain
aNot ‘camel’. The roots of the words for ‘camel’ and ‘thick twisted rope’ are the
same in Arabic and ‘rope’ makes more sense here (Razi).The Heights 97 7:48men they recognize by their marks, ‘What use were your great
numbers and your false pride? 49And are these the people you swore
God would never bless? [Now these people are being told], “Enterthe Garden! No fear for you, nor shall you grieve.”’
50The people of the Fire will call to the people of Paradise, ‘Give
us some water, or any of the sustenance God has granted you!’ andthey will reply, ‘God has forbidden both to the disbelievers– –51those
who took their religion for distraction, a mere game, and weredeluded by worldly life.’ Today We shall ignore
a them, just as
they have ignored their meeting with this Day and denied OurRevelations.
52We have brought people a Scripture– – We have explained it on
the basis of true knowledge– – as guidance and mercy for those who
believe. 53What are they waiting for but the ful ﬁlment of its [ ﬁnal
prophecy]? On the Day it is ful ﬁlled, those who had ignored it will
say, ‘Our Lord’s messenger spoke the truth. Is there anyone to inter-cede for us now? Or can we be sent back to behave di ﬀerently from
the way we behaved before?’ They will really have squandered theirsouls, and all [the idols] they invented will have deserted them.
54Your Lord is God, who created the heavens and earth in six
Days, then established Himself on the throne; He makes the nightcover the day in swift pursuit; He created the sun, moon, and stars tobe subservient to His command; all creation and command belong toHim. Exalted be God, Lord of all the worlds! 55Call on your Lord
humbly and privately– – He does not like those who transgress His
bounds: 56do not corrupt the earth after it has been set right– – call on
Him fearing and hoping. The mercy of God is close to those who do
good. 57It is God who sends the winds, bearing good news of His
coming grace, and when they have gathered up the heavy clouds, Wedrive them to a dead land where We cause rain to fall, bringing outall kinds of crops, just as We shall bring out the dead. Will you notreﬂect? 58Vegetation comes out of good land in abundance, by the
will of its Lord, but out of bad land only scantily: We explain OurRevelations in various ways to those who give thanks.
59We sent Noah to his people. He said, ‘My people, serve God:
you have no god other than Him. I fear for you the punishment of afearsome Day!’ 60but the prominent leaders of his people said, ‘We
a‘Ignore’ is one of the meanings of the Arabic nasiya  normally translated as ‘forget’.The Qur ᾿an 7:49 98believe you are far astray.’ 61He replied, ‘My people, there is nothing
astray about me! On the contrary, I am a messenger from the Lord ofall the Worlds: 62I am delivering my Lord’s messages to you and
giving you sincere advice. I know things from God that you do not.63Do you ﬁnd it so strange that a message should come from your
Lord– – through a man in your midst– – to warn you and make you
aware of God so that you may be given mercy?’ 64but they called him
a liar. We saved him, and those who were with him, on the Ark andWe drowned those who rejected Our revelations– – they were wilfully
blind.
65To the people of ῾Ad We sent their brother, Hud. He said, ‘My
people, serve God: you have no god other than Him. Will you not
take heed?’ 66but the disbelieving leaders of his people said, ‘We
believe you are a fool,’ and ‘We think you are a liar.’ 67He said, ‘My
people, there is nothing foolish about me! On the contrary, I am amessenger from the Lord of all the Worlds: 68I am delivering my
Lord’s messages to you. I am your sincere and honest adviser. 69Do
you ﬁnd it so strange that a message should come from your Lord,
through a man in your midst, to warn you? Remember how He madeyou heirs after Noah’s people, and increased your stature: rememberGod’s bounties, so that you may prosper.’ 70They said, ‘Have you
really come to tell us to serve God alone and to forsake what our
forefathers served? If what you say is true, bring us the punishmentyou threaten.’ 71He said, ‘You are already set to receive your Lord’s
loathing and anger. Are you arguing with me about mere names youand your forefathers invented, names for which God has given nosanction? Just wait; I too am waiting.’ 72We saved him, and those who
were with him, through Our mercy; We destroyed those who deniedOur revelations and would not believe.
73To the people of Thamud We sent their brother, Salih. He said,
‘My people, serve God: you have no god other than Him. A clearsign has come to you now from your Lord: this is God’s she-camel– –
a sign for you– – so let her graze in God’s land and do not harm her in
any way, or you will be struck by a painful torment. 74Remember
how He made you heirs after ῾Ad and settled you in the land to build
yourselves castles on its plains and carve houses out of the moun-tains: remember God’s blessings and do not spread corruption in the
land,’ 75but the arrogant leaders among his people said to the
believers they thought to be of no account, ‘Do you honestly thinkThe Heights
99 7:75that Salih is a messenger from his Lord?’ They said, ‘Yes. We believe
in the message sent through him,’ 76but the arrogant leaders said,
‘We reject what you believe in,’ 77and then they hamstrung the
camel. They de ﬁed their Lord’s commandment and said, ‘Salih,
bring down the punishment you threaten, if you really are a messen-ger!’ 78An earthquake seized them: by the next morning they were
lying dead in their homes. 79So he turned away from them, saying,
‘My people, I delivered my Lord’s messages to you and gave yousincere advice, but you did not like those who gave sincere advice.’
80We sent Lot and he said to his people, ‘How can you practise this
outrage? No one in the world has outdone you in this. 81You lust
after men rather than women! You transgress all bounds!’ 82The only
response his people gave was to say [to one another], ‘Drive them
out of your town! These men want to keep themselves chaste!’83We saved him and his kinsfolk– – apart from his wife who stayed
behind– –84and We showered upon [the rest of] them a rain [of
destruction]. See the fate of the evildoers.
85To the people of Midian We sent their brother, Shu ῾ayb. He said,
‘My people, serve God: you have no god other than Him. A clearsign has come to you from your Lord. Give full measure and weightand do not undervalue people’s goods; do not cause corruption inthe land after it has been set in order: this is better for you, if you arebelievers. 86Do not sit in every pathway, threatening and barring
those who believe in God from His way, trying to make it crooked.Remember how you used to be few and He made you multiply.Think about the fate of those who used to spread corruption. 87If
some of you believe the message I bring and others do not, then bepatient till God judges between us. He is the best of all judges.’
88His people’s arrogant leaders said, ‘Shu ῾ayb, we will expel you
and your fellow believers from our town unless you return to ourreligion.’ He said, ‘What! Even if we detest it? 89If we were to return
to your religion after God has saved us from it, we would be invent-ing lies about Him: there is no way we could return to it– – unless by
the will of God our Lord: in His knowledge He comprehends every-
thing. We put our trust in God. Our Lord, expose the truth [and
judge] between us and our people, for You are the best judge.’ 90The
disbelieving leaders among his people said, ‘You will certainly belosers if you follow Shu ῾ayb’––91an earthquake seized them: by the
next morning they were lying dead in their homes; 92it was as if thoseThe Qur ᾿an 7:76 100who had rejected Shu ῾ayb had never lived there; it was those who
had rejected Shu ῾ayb who were the losers– –93so he turned away
from them, saying, ‘My people, I delivered my Lord’s messages toyou and gave you sincere advice, so why should I grieve for peoplewho refused to believe?’
94Whenever We sent a prophet to a town, We a ﬄicted its [dis-
believing]
a people with su ﬀering and hardships, so that they might
humble themselves [before God], 95and then We changed their
hardship into prosperity, until they multiplied. But then they said,‘Hardship and a ﬄuence also befell our forefathers,’ and so We took
them suddenly, unawares. 96If the people of those towns had believed
and been mindful of God, We would have showered them withblessings from the heavens and earth, but they rejected the truth andso We punished them for their misdeeds.
97Do the people of these towns feel secure that Our punishment
will not come upon them by night, while they are asleep? 98Do the
people of these towns feel secure that Our punishment will not comeupon them by day, while they are at play? 99Do they feel secure
against God’s plan? Only the losers feel secure against God’s plan.100Is it not clear to those who inherit the land from former gener-
ations that We can punish them too for their sins if We will? Andseal up their hearts so that they cannot hear? 101We have told you
[Prophet] the stories of those towns: messengers came to them, andclear signs, but they would not believe in what they had alreadyrejected– – in this way God seals the hearts of disbelievers. 102We
found that most of them did not honour their commitments; Wefound that most of them were de ﬁant.
103After these, We sent Moses to Pharaoh and his leading sup-
porters with Our signs, but they rejected them. See the fate ofthose who used to spread corruption. 104Moses said, ‘Pharaoh, I am a
messenger from the Lord of all the Worlds, 105duty-bound to say
nothing about God but the truth, and I have brought you a clear signfrom your Lord. Let the Children of Israel go with me.’ 106He said,
‘Produce this sign you have brought, if you are telling the truth.’
107So Moses threw his sta ﬀ and– – lo and behold!– – it was a snake,
clear to all, 108and then he pulled out his hand and– – lo and
aThis is implied in Arabic (Razi).The Heights 101 7:108behold!– – it was white for all to see. 109The leaders among Pharaoh’s
people said, ‘This man is a learned sorcerer! 110He means to drive
you out of your land!’ Pharaoh said, ‘What do you suggest?’ 111They
said, ‘Delay him and his brother for a while, and send messengers toall the cities 112to summon every learned sorcerer to you.’
113The sorcerers came to Pharaoh and said, ‘Shall we be rewarded
if we win?’ 114and he replied, ‘Yes, and you will join my inner court.’
115So they said, ‘Moses, will you throw ﬁrst or shall we?’ 116He
said, ‘You throw,’ and they did, casting a spell on people’s eyes,
striking fear into them, and bringing about great sorcery. 117Then
We inspired Moses, ‘Throw your sta ﬀ,’ and– – lo and behold!– –i t
devoured their fakery. 118The truth was con ﬁrmed and what they
had produced came to nothing: 119they were defeated there and
utterly humiliated. 120The sorcerers fell to their knees 121and said,
‘We believe in the Lord of the Worlds, 122the Lord of Moses and
Aaron!’ 123but Pharaoh said, ‘How dare you believe in Him before I
have given you permission? This is a plot you have hatched to drivethe people out of this city! Soon you will see: 124I will cut o ﬀ your
alternate hands and feet
a and then crucify you all!’ 125They said,
‘And so we shall return to our Lord– –126Your only grievance against
us is that we believed in the signs of our Lord when they came tous. Our Lord, pour steadfastness upon us and let us die in devotionto You.’
127The leaders among Pharaoh’s people said to him, ‘But are you
going to leave Moses and his people to spread corruption in the landand forsake you and your gods?’ He replied, ‘We shall kill their malechildren, sparing only the females: We have complete power overthem.’ 128Moses said to his people, ‘Turn to God for help and be
steadfast: the earth belongs to God– – He gives it as their own to
whichever of His servants He chooses– – and the happy future
belongs to those who are mindful of Him,’ 129and they replied, ‘We
were being persecuted long before you came to us, and since thentoo.’ He said, ‘Your Lord may well destroy your enemy and makeyou successors to the land to see how you behave.’
130We in ﬂicted years of drought and crop failure on Pharaoh’s
people, so that they might take heed, 131then, when something good
came their way, they said, ‘This is our due!’. When something bad
aLeft hand and right foot or vice versa.The Qur ᾿an 7:109 102came, they ascribed it to the evil omen of Moses and those with him,
but their ‘evil omen’ was really from God, though most of them didnot realize it. 132They said, ‘We will not believe in you, no matter
what signs you produce to cast a spell on us,’ 133and so We let loose
on them the ﬂood, locusts, lice, frogs, blood– – all clear signs. They
were arrogant, wicked people. 134They would say, whenever a plague
struck them, ‘Moses, pray to your Lord for us by virtue of the
promise He has made to you: if you relieve us of the plague, we willbelieve you and let the Children of Israel go with you,’ 135but when
We relieved them of the plague and gave them a ﬁxed period [in
which to ful ﬁl their promise]– – lo and behold!– – they broke it. 136And
so, because they rejected Our signs and paid them no heed, We
exacted retribution from them: We drowned them in the sea 137and
We made those who had been oppressed succeed to both the east andthe west of the land that We had blessed. Your Lord’s good promiseto the Children of Israel was ful ﬁlled, because of their patience, and
We destroyed what Pharaoh and his people were making and whatthey were building.
138We took the Children of Israel across the sea, but when they
came upon a people who worshipped idols, they said, ‘Moses, make agod for us like theirs.’ He said, ‘You really are foolish people: 139[the
cult] these people practise is doomed to destruction, and what they
have been doing is useless. 140Why should I seek any god other than
God for you, when He has favoured you over all other people?’141Remember how We saved you from Pharaoh’s people, who were
subjecting you to the worst of su ﬀerings, killing your male children,
sparing only your females– – that was a mighty ordeal from your
Lord.
142We appointed thirty nights for Moses, then added ten more: the
term set by his Lord was completed in forty nights. Moses said to hisbrother Aaron, ‘Take my place among my people: act rightly and donot follow the way of those who spread corruption.’ 143When Moses
came for the appointment, and his Lord spoke to him, he said, ‘MyLord, show Yourself to me: let me see You!’ He said, ‘You will never
see Me, but look at that mountain: if it remains standing ﬁrm, you
will see Me,’ and when his Lord revealed Himself to the mountain,He made it crumble: Moses fell down unconscious. When he
recovered, he said, ‘Glory be to You! To You I turn in repentance! Iam the ﬁrst to believe!’ 144He said, ‘Moses, I have raised you aboveThe Heights
103 7:144other people by [giving you] My messages and speaking to you: hold
on to what I have given you; be one of those who give thanks.’
145We inscribed everything for him in the Tablets which taught
and explained everything, saying, ‘Hold on to them ﬁrmly and urge
your people to hold fast to their excellent teachings. I will show youthe end of those who rebel. 146I will keep distracted from My signs
those who behave arrogantly on Earth without any right, and who,
even if they see every sign, will not believe in them; they will not takethe way of right guidance if they see it, but will take the way of error
if they see that. This is because they denied Our signs and paid them
no heed: 147the deeds of those who denied Our signs and the Meet-
ing of the Hereafter will come to nothing– – why should they be
repaid for anything other than what they have done?’
148In his absence, Moses’ people took to worshipping a mere shape
that made sounds like a cow– – a calf made from their jewellery.
Could they not see that it did not speak to them or guide them in anyway? Yet they took it for worship: they were evildoers. 149When, with
much wringing of hands, they perceived that they were doing wrong,they said, ‘If our Lord does not have mercy and forgive us, we shallbe the losers.’ 150On his return to his people, angry and aggrieved,
Moses said, ‘How foul and evil is what you have done in my absence!
Were you so keen to bring your Lord’s judgement forward?’ He
threw the tablets down and seized his brother by the hair, pullinghim towards him. Aaron said, ‘Son of my mother, these people over-powered me! They almost killed me! Do not give my enemies reasonto rejoice! Do not include me with these evildoers!’ 151Moses said,
‘My Lord, forgive me and my brother; accept us into Your mercy:You are the Most Merciful of all who show mercy. 152Those who
took to worshipping the calf will be a ﬄicted by their Lord’s wrath,
and by disgrace in this life.’ This is the way We repay those whoinvent such falsehoods, 153but your Lord is most forgiving and most
merciful towards those who do wrong, then repent afterwards andtruly believe.
154When Moses’ anger abated, he picked up the Tablets, on
which were inscribed guidance and mercy for those who stood in awe
of their Lord. 155Moses chose from his people seventy men for Our
appointment, and when they were seized by trembling, he prayed,‘My Lord, if You had chosen to do so, You could have destroyedthem long before this, and me too, so will You now destroy us forThe Qur ᾿an 7:145 104what the foolish among us have done? This is only a trial from You– –
through it, You cause whoever You will to stray and guide whoeverYou will– – and You are our Protector, so forgive us and have
mercy on us. You are the best of those who forgive. 156Grant us good
things in this world and in the life to come. We turn to You.’ Godsaid, ‘I bring My punishment on whoever I will, but My mercyencompasses all things.
‘I shall ordain My mercy for those who are conscious of God and
pay the prescribed alms; who believe in Our Revelations; 157who
follow the Messenger– – the unlettered
a prophet they ﬁnd described
in the Torah that is with them, and in the Gospel– – who commands
them to do right and forbids them to do wrong, who makes goodthings lawful to them and bad things unlawful, and relieves them oftheir burdens, and the iron collars
b that were on them. So it is those
who believe him, honour and help him, and who follow the lightwhich has been sent down with him, who will succeed.’ 158Say
[Muhammad], ‘People, I am the Messenger of God to you all,from Him who has control over the heavens and the earth. Thereis no God but Him; He gives life and death, so believe in God andHis Messenger, the unlettered prophet who believes in God and Hiswords, and follow him so that you may ﬁnd guidance.’
159There is a group among the people of Moses who guide with
truth, and who act justly according to it. 160We divided them into
twelve tribes [as distinct] communities, and, when his people asked
him for water, inspired Moses to strike the rock with his sta ﬀ [so
that] twelve springs gushed out. Each tribe knew its own drinkingplace; We gave them the shade of clouds and sent down to themmanna and quails [saying], ‘Eat the good things We have provided foryou.’ They did not wrong Us; it was themselves they wronged.161When they were told, ‘Enter this town and eat freely there as you
will, but say, “Relieve us!” and enter its gate humbly: then We shallforgive you your sins, and increase the reward of those who do good,’162the wrongdoers among them substituted another saying for that
which had been given them, so We sent them a punishment fromheaven for their wrongdoing.
aUmmi  can mean ‘unlettered’ or ‘gentile’.
bCf. 6:146. This reference is said by interpreters to refer to the di ﬃcult obligations
imposed on the Children of Israel.The Heights 105 7:162163[Prophet], ask them about the town by the sea; how its people
broke the Sabbath when their ﬁsh surfaced for them only on that
day, never on weekdays– – We tested them in this way: because of
their disobedience– –164how, when some of them asked [their
preachers], ‘Why do you bother preaching to people God will des-troy, or at least punish severely?’ [the preachers] answered, ‘In orderto be free from your Lord’s blame, and so that they may perhaps takeheed.’ 165When they ignored [the warning] they were given, We
saved those who forbade evil, and punished the wrongdoers severely
because of their disobedience. 166When, in their arrogance, they per-
sisted in doing what they had been forbidden to do, We said to them,‘Be like apes!
a Be outcasts!’ 167And then your Lord declared that,
until the Day of Resurrection, He would send people against them toinﬂict terrible su ﬀering on them. Your Lord is swift in punishment
but He is most forgiving and merciful.
168We dispersed them over the earth in separate communities– –
some are righteous and some less so: We tested them with blessingsand misfortunes, so that they might all return [to righteousness]– –
169and they were succeeded by generations who, although they
inherited the Scripture, took the ﬂeeting gains of this lower world,
saying, ‘We shall be forgiven,’ and indeed taking them again if othersuch gains came their way. Was a pledge not taken from them, writ-
ten in the Scripture, to say nothing but the truth about God? Andthey have studied its contents well. For those who are mindful ofGod, the Hereafter is better. ‘Why do you not use your reason?’170But as for those who hold fast to the Scripture and keep up the
prayer, We do not deny righteous people their rewards. 171When We
made the mountain loom high above them like a shadow, and theythought it would fall on them, We said, ‘Hold fast to what We havegiven you, and remember what it contains, so that you may remainconscious of God.’
172[Prophet], when your Lord took out the o ﬀspring from the
loins of the Children of Adam and made them bear witness about
themselves, He said, ‘Am I not your Lord?’ and they replied, ‘Yes,
we bear witness.’ So you cannot say on the Day of Resurrection, ‘Wewere not aware of this,’ 173or, ‘It was our forefathers who, before us,
ascribed partners to God, and we are only the descendants who came
aCf. note to 2:65.The Qur ᾿an 7:163 106after them: will you destroy us because of falsehoods they invented?’
174In this way We explain the messages, so that they may turn [to the
right path].
175[Prophet], tell them the story of the man to whom We gave Our
messages: he sloughed them o ﬀ, so Satan took him as his follower
and he went astray– –176if it had been Our will, We could have used
these signs to raise him high, but instead he clung to the earth and
followed his own desires– – he was like a dog that pants with a lolling
tongue whether you drive it away or leave it alone. Such is the image
of those who reject Our signs. Tell them the story so that they may
reﬂect. 177How foul is the image of those who reject Our signs! It is
themselves they wrong: 178whoever God guides is truly guided, and
whoever God allows to stray is a loser. 179We have created many jinn
and people who are destined for Hell, with hearts they do not use forcomprehension, eyes they do not use for sight, ears they do not usefor hearing. They are like cattle, no, even further astray: these arethe ones who are entirely heedless.
180The Most Excellent Names belong to God: use them to call on
Him, and keep away from those who abuse them– – they will be
requited for what they do. 181Among those We created are a group of
people who guide with truth and act justly according to it. 182But We
lead on those who reject Our messages, step by step, without them
realizing it: 183I will give them respite, but My plan is sure. 184Has it
not occurred to them that their companion
a is not mad but is giving
clear warning? 185Have they not contemplated the realm of the
heavens and earth and all that God created, and that the end of theirtime might be near? What [other revelation] will they believe in ifthey do not believe in this? 186No one can guide those God allows to
stray: He leaves them blundering about in their insolence.
187They ask you [Prophet] about the Hour, ‘When will it happen?’
Say, ‘My Lord alone has knowledge of it: He alone will reveal whenits time will come, a time that is momentous
b in both the heavens and
earth. All too suddenly it will come upon you.’ They ask you aboutit as if you were eager [to ﬁnd out]. Say, ‘God alone has knowledge
of [when it will come], though most people do not realize it.’ 188Say
[Prophet], ‘I have no control over bene ﬁt or harm, [even] to myself,
aThis refers to Prophet Muhammad.
bAlternatively Suddi gives ‘hidden from’ as the interpretation of thaqulat  (Razi),
literally ‘weighs heavy’.The Heights 107 7:188except as God may please: if I had knowledge of what is hidden, I
would have abundant good things and no harm could touch me.I am no more than a bearer of warning, and good news to thosewho believe.’
189It is He who created you all from one soul, and from it made its
mate so that he might ﬁnd comfort in her: when one [of them] lies
with his wife and she conceives a light burden, going about freely,
then grows heavy, they both pray to God, their Lord, ‘If You give usa good child we shall certainly be grateful,’ 190and yet when He gives
them a good child they ascribe some of what He has granted them to
others. 191God is far above the partners they set up alongside Him!
How can they set up with Him these partners that create nothing
and are themselves created, 192that cannot help them at all, or even
help themselves?
193If you [believers] call such people to guidance, they do not fol-
low you: it makes no di ﬀerence whether you call them or remain
silent. 194Those you [idolaters] call upon instead of God are created
beings like you. Call upon them, then, and let them respond to you ifwhat you say is true. 195Do they have feet to walk, hands to strike, eyes
to see, or ears to hear? Say [Prophet], ‘Call on your “partners”!Scheme against me! Do not spare me! 196My protector is God: He has
revealed the Scripture, and it is He who protects the righteous, 197but
those you call on instead of Him cannot help you or even help them-selves.’ 198If you [believers] call such people to guidance, they do not
hear. You [Prophet] may observe them looking at you, but they can-not see. 199Be tolerant and command what is right: pay no attention to
foolish people. 200If Satan should prompt you to do something, seek
refuge with God– – He is all hearing, all knowing– –201those who are
aware of God think of Him when Satan prompts them to do some-thing and immediately they can see [straight]; 202the followers of
devils
a are led relentlessly into error by them and cannot stop.
203When you do not bring them a fresh revelation, they say, ‘But
can you not just ask for one?’ Say, ‘I merely repeatb what is revealed
to me from my Lord: this revelation brings you insights fromyour Lord, and guidance and mercy for those who believe, 204so pay
aIkhwan ‘brothers’– –cf. 17:27, where the devils’ followers are described as their
ikhwan .
bCf. 75:18.The Qur ᾿an 7:189 108attention and listen quietly when the Qur ᾿an is recited, so that you
may be given mercy.’ 205[Prophet], remember your Lord inwardly, in
all humility and awe, without raising your voice, in the mornings andin the evenings– – do not be one of the heedless– –206[even] those who
live in the presence of your Lord are not too proud to worship Him:they glorify Him and bow down before Him.The Heights
109 7:2068. BATTLE GAINS
The main part of this Medinan sura is a comment on the Battle of Badr (near
Medina), the ﬁrst fought between the Muslims and their Meccan opponents in
the second year after the Migration. The Muslims, some of whom were at ﬁrst
reluctant to ﬁght, won in spite of being vastly outnumbered, and began to
question the distribution of the gains. The sura reminds them that it was Godwho brought about the victory. Verse 41 shows how the gains were to be distrib-
uted. It advises Muslims and comments on the role of the hypocrites and onthose who always break their treaties (verse 56), ending with a statement about
loyalties and alliances.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1They ask you [Prophet] about [distributing] the battle gains. Say,
‘That is a matter for God and His Messenger, so be mindful of Godand make things right between you. Obey God and His Messengerif you are true believers: 2true believers are those whose hearts
tremble with awe when God is mentioned, whose faith increaseswhen His revelations are recited to them, who put their trust intheir Lord, 3who keep up the prayer and give to others out of what
We provide for them. 4Those are the ones who truly believe. They
have high standing with their Lord, forgiveness, and generousprovision.’
5For
a it was your Lord who made you [Prophet] venture from your
home for a true purpose– –though a group of the believers disliked it6and argued with you about the truth after it had been made clear, as
if they were being driven towards a death they could see with theirown eyes. 7Remember how God promised you [believers] that one of
the two enemy groups
b would fall to you: you wanted the unarmed
group to be yours, but it was God’s will to establish the truth accord-ing to His Word and to ﬁnish o ﬀ the disbelievers– – 8to prove the
Truth to be true, and the false to be false, much as the guilty mightdislike it. 9When you begged your Lord for help, He answered you,
‘I will reinforce you with a thousand angels in succession.’ 10God
aThis links to v . 1.
bThe Meccan trade caravan or their army.made this a message of hope to reassure your hearts: help comes only
from God, He is mighty and wise. 11Remember when He gave you
sleepa as a reassurance from Him, and sent down water from the sky
to cleanse you, to remove Satan’s pollution from you, to make yourhearts strong and your feet ﬁrm. 12Your Lord revealed to the angels:
‘I am with you: give the believers ﬁrmness; I shall put terror into
the hearts of the disbelievers– – strike above their necks and strike all
their ﬁngertips.’ 13That was because they opposed God and His
Messenger, and if anyone opposes God and His Messenger, Godpunishes them severely– –14‘That is what you get! Taste that!’– –and
the torment of the Fire awaits the disbelievers.
15Believers, when you meet the disbelievers in battle, never turn
your backs on them: 16if anyone does so on such a day– – unless
manœuvring to ﬁght or to join a ﬁghting group– – he incurs the wrath
of God, and Hell will be his home, a wretched destination! 17It was
not you who killed them but God, and when you [Prophet] threw[sand at them]
b it was not your throw [that defeated them] but
God’s, to do the believers a favour: God is all seeing and all know-ing––18‘That is what you get!’– –and God will weaken the dis-
believers’ designs. 19[Disbelievers], if you were seeking a decision,
now you have witnessed one: if you stop here, it will be better foryou. If you return, so shall We, and your forces, though greater innumber, will be of no use to you. God is with the believers.
20Believers, obey God and His Messenger: do not turn away when
you are listening to him; 21do not be like those who say, ‘We heard,’
though in fact they were not listening– –22the worst creatures in
God’s eyes are those who are [wilfully] deaf and dumb, who do notreason. 23If God had known there was any good in them, He would
have made them hear, but even if He had, they would still haveturned away and taken no notice. 24Believers, respond to God and
His Messenger when he calls you to that which gives you life. Knowthat God comes between a man and his heart,
c and that you will be
gathered to Him. 25Beware of discord that harms not only the
wrongdoers among you: know that God is severe in His punishment.
aOn the night before the battle.
bBefore the battle, the Prophet prayed and threw a handful of sand at the enemy as a
symbol of their being defeated.
cThere are various ways of interpreting this, including that, through death, God
separates a man from his heart’s desire, i.e. life.Battle Gains 111 8:2526Remember when you were few, victimized in the land, afraid
that people might catch you, but God sheltered you and strength-ened you with His help, and provided you with good things so thatyou might be grateful. 27Believers, do not betray God and the
Messenger, or knowingly betray [other people’s] trust in you. 28Be
aware that your possessions and your children are only a test, andthat there is a tremendous reward with God. 29Believers, if you
remain mindful of God, He will give you a criterion [to tell rightfrom wrong] and wipe out your bad deeds, and forgive you: God’s
favour is great indeed.
30Remember [Prophet] when the disbelievers plotted to take you
captive, kill, or expel you. They schemed and so did God: He is the
best of schemers. 31Whenever Our Revelation is recited to them they
say, ‘We have heard all this before– – we could say something like this
if we wanted– – this is nothing but ancient fables.’ 32They also said,
‘God, if this really is the truth from You, then rain stones on us fromthe heavens, or send us some other painful punishment.’ 33But God
would not send them punishment while you [Prophet] are in theirmidst, nor would He punish them if they sought forgiveness, 34yet
why should God not punish them when they debar people from theSacred Mosque, although they are not its [rightful] guardians? Onlythose mindful of God are its rightful guardians, but most of thedisbelievers do not realize this. 35Their prayers before the House are
nothing but whistling and clapping. ‘So taste the punishment
a for
your disbelief.’ 36They use their wealth to bar people from the path
of God, and they will go on doing so. In the end this will be a sourceof intense regret for them: they will be overcome and herded towardsHell. 37God will separate the bad from the good, place the bad on top
of one another– – heaping them all up together– – and put them in
Hell. They will be the losers. 38[Prophet], tell the disbelievers that if
they desist their past will be forgiven, but if they persist, they havean example in the fate of those who went before. 39[Believers], ﬁght
them until there is no more persecution, and all worship
b is devoted
to God alone: if they desist, then God sees all that they do, 40but
if they pay no heed, be sure that God is your protector, the bestprotector and the best helper.
aThis could allude to their defeat in the battle.
bAt the Sacred House; cf. 2:191–3,2:17.The Qur ᾿an 8:26 11241Know that one- ﬁfth of your battle gains belongs to God and the
Messenger, to close relatives and orphans, to the needy and travel-lers, if you believe in God and the revelation We sent down to Ourservant on the day of the decision, the day when the two forces metin battle. God has power over all things. 42Remember when you were
on the near side of the valley, and they were on the far side and thecaravan was below you. If you had made an appointment to ﬁght, you
would have failed to keep it [but the battle took place] so that God
might bring about something already ordained, so that those whowere to die might die after seeing a clear proof, and so that thosewho were to live might live after seeing a clear proof– – God is all
hearing and all seeing.
43[Prophet], remember when God made you see them in your
sleep as few: if He had shown them to you [believers] as many, youwould certainly have lost heart and argued about it, but God savedyou. He knows the secrets of the heart. 44When you met He showed
them to you as few, and He made you few in their eyes, so that Hemight bring about what has been ordained: everything goes backto God.
45Believers, when you meet a force in battle, stand ﬁrm and keep
God ﬁrmly in mind, so that you may prosper. 46Obey God and His
Messenger, and do not quarrel with one another, or you may loseheart and your spirit may desert you. Be steadfast: God is with thesteadfast. 47Do not be like those who came out of their homes full
of conceit, showing o ﬀ to people, and barring others from the way of
God– – God has full knowledge of all that they do. 48Satan made their
foul deeds seem fair to them, and said, ‘No one will conquer youtoday, for I will be right beside you,’ but when the armies camewithin sight of one another he turned on his heels, saying, ‘This iswhere I leave you: I see what you do not, and I fear God– – God is
severe in His punishment.’
49The hypocrites and those who have sickness in their hearts said,
‘These people [the believers] must be deluded by their religion,’ butif anyone puts his trust in God, God is mighty and wise. 50If only
you [Prophet] could see, when the angels take the souls of the dis-
believers, how they strike their faces and backs: it will be said, ‘Tastethe punishment of the Fire. 51This is caused by what your own
hands have stored up for you: God is never unjust to His creatures.’52They are like Pharaoh’s people and those before them who ignoredBattle Gains
113 8:52God’s signs, so God punished them for their sins: God is strong and
severe in His punishment. 53[He did] this because God would never
change a favour He had conferred on a people unless they changedwhat was within themselves. God is all hearing, all knowing. 54They
are indeed like Pharaoh’s people and those before them, who deniedthe signs of their Lord: We destroyed them for their sins, and Wedrowned Pharaoh’s people– – they were all evildoers.
55The worst creatures in the sight of God are those who reject
Him and will not believe; 56who, whenever you [Prophet] make a
treaty with them, break it, for they have no fear of God. 57If you
meet them in battle, make a fearsome example of them to thosewho come after them, so that they may take heed. 58And if you
learn of treachery on the part of any people, throw their treatyback at them, for God does not love the treacherous. 59The dis-
believers should not think they have won; they cannot escape.60Prepare whatever forces you [believers] can muster, including
warhorses, to frighten o ﬀ God’s enemies and yours, and warn
others unknown to you but known to God. Whatever you give inGod’s cause will be repaid to you in full, and you will not bewronged. 61But if they incline towards peace, you [Prophet] must
also incline towards it, and put your trust in God: He is the AllHearing, the All Knowing. 62If they intend to deceive you, God is
enough for you: it was He who strengthened you with His help,63and with the believers, and brought their hearts together. Even if
you had given away everything in the earth you could not have donethis, but God brought them together: God is mighty and wise.64Prophet, God is enough for you, and for the believers who follow
you. 65Prophet, urge the believers to ﬁght: if there are twenty of you
who are steadfast, they will overcome two hundred, and a hundredof you, if steadfast, will overcome a thousand of the disbelievers, forthey are people who do not understand. 66But God has lightened
your burden for now, knowing that there is weakness in you– –a
steadfast hundred of you will defeat two hundred and a steadfastthousand of you will defeat two thousand, by God’s permission:
God is with the steadfast.
67It is not right for a prophet to take captives before he has
aTranslators use ‘if you fear’, but one of the old meanings of khafa  is ‘to know’ and
‘to be certain’.The Qur ᾿an 8:53 114conquered the battle ﬁeld. You [people] desire the transient goods of
this world, but God desires the Hereafter [for you]– – God is mighty
and wise– –68and had it not been preordained by God, a severe pun-
ishment would have come upon you for what you have taken. 69So
enjoya in a good and lawful manner the things you have gained in
war and be mindful of God: He is forgiving and merciful.
70Prophet, tell those you have taken captive, ‘If God knows of
any good in your hearts, He will give you something better than what
has been taken from you, and He will forgive you: God is forgiving
and merciful.’ 71But if they mean to betray you, they have betrayed
God before, and He has given you mastery over them: He is allknowing, all wise.
72Those who believed and emigrated [to Medina] and struggled
for God’s cause with their possessions and persons, and those whogave refuge and help, are all allies of one another. As for thosewho believed but did not emigrate, you are not responsible for theirprotection until they have done so. But if they seek help from you
against persecution, it is your duty to assist them, except againstpeople with whom you have a treaty: God sees all that you do.
73The disbelievers support one another. If you do not do the same,
there will be persecution in the land and great corruption. 74Those
who believed and emigrated, and struggled for God’s cause, andthose who gave refuge and help– – they are the true believers and they
will have forgiveness and generous provision. 75And those who came
to believe afterwards, and emigrated and struggled alongside you,they are part of you, but relatives still have prior claim over oneanother in God’s Scripture: God has full knowledge of all things.
aLiterally ‘eat’.Battle Gains 115 8:759. REPENTANCE
A Medinan sura whose title is taken from verse 104. The sura opens by giving
notice of the severance of the treaty with the idolaters because they had brokenit, but the bulk of the sura deals with preparations and recruitment forthe expedition to Tabuk, which took place in the heat of the summer of 
ah9
(631ce). The hypocrites and those who stayed behind and failed to support
the Prophet are all censured. This is the only sura not to begin with the formula‘In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy’; there is anopinion that suras 8 and 9 are in fact just one sura.
1A release by God and His Messenger from the treaty you
[believers] made with the idolaters [is announced]– – 2you [idolaters]
may move freely about the land for four months, but you shouldbear in mind both that you will not escape God, and that God willdisgrace those who defy [Him].
a3On the Day of the Great Pilgrim-
age [there will be] a proclamation from God and His Messengerto all people: ‘God and His Messenger are released from [treaty]obligations to the idolaters. It will be better for you [idolaters] ifyou repent; know that you cannot escape God if you turn away.’[Prophet], warn those who ignore [God] that they will have a pain-ful punishment. 4As for those who have honoured the treaty you
made with them and who have not supported anyone against you:fulﬁl your agreement with them to the end of their term. God loves
those who are mindful of Him.
5When the [four] forbidden months are over, wherever
b you
encounter the idolaters,c kill them, seize them, besiege them, wait
for them at every lookout post; but if they turn [to God], maintainthe prayer, and pay the prescribed alms, let them go on their way, forGod is most forgiving and merciful. 6If any one of the idolaters
should seek your protection [Prophet], grant it to him so that he mayhear the word of God, then take him to a place safe for him, for theyare people with no knowledge [of it]. 7How could there be a treaty
a‘Kafara bi  (something)’ in Arabic can mean ‘disown (something)’ ( al-Mu ῾jam
al-Wasit ), so kuﬀar here could also mean ‘those who disown [the treaty]’.
bInside or outside the Sanctuary in Mecca. See note d to 2:191.
cIn this context, this de ﬁnitely refers to the ones who broke the treaty. The article
here is ahdiya  (speci ﬁc) referring to what has already been stated.with God and His Messenger for such idolaters? But as for those
with whom you made a treaty at the Sacred Mosque, so long as theyremain true to you, be true to them; God loves those who are mind-ful of Him. 8[How,] when, if they were to get the upper hand over
you, they would not respect any tie with you, of kinship or of treaty?They please you with their tongues, but their hearts are against youand most of them are lawbreakers. 9They have sold God’s message
for a tri ﬂing gain, and barred others from His path. How evil their
actions are! 10Where believers are concerned, they respect no tie of
kinship or treaty. They are the ones who are committing aggression.11If they turn to God, keep up the prayer, and pay the prescribed
alms, then they are your brothers in faith: We make the messagesclear for people who are willing to learn. 12But if they break their
oath after having made an agreement with you, if they revile yourreligion, then ﬁght the leaders of disbelief– – oaths mean nothing to
them– – so that they may stop. 13How could you not ﬁght a people
who have broken their oaths, who tried to drive the Messenger out,who attacked you ﬁrst? Do you fear them? It is God you should fear
if you are true believers. 14Fight them: God will punish them at your
hands, He will disgrace them, He will help you to conquer them, He
will heal the believers’ feelings 15and remove the rage from their
hearts. God turns to whoever He will in His mercy; God is allknowing and wise. 16Do you think that you will be left untested
a
without God identifying which of you will strive for His cause and
take no supporters apart from God, His Messenger, and otherbelievers? God is fully aware of all your actions.
17It is not right for the idolaters to tend God’s places of worship
while testifying to their own disbelief: the deeds of such people willcome to nothing and they will abide in Hell. 18The only ones who
should tend God’s places of worship are those who believe in Godand the Last Day, who keep up the prayer, who pay the prescribedalms, and who fear no one but God: such people may hope to beamong the rightly guided. 19Do you consider giving water to pil-
grims and tending the Sacred Mosque to be equal to the deeds ofthose who believe in God and the Last Day and who strive inGod’s path? They are not equal in God’s eyes. God does not guidesuch benighted people. 20Those who believe, who migrated and
aSee also 29:2.Repentance 117 9:20strove hard in God’s way with their possessions and their persons,
are in God’s eyes much higher in rank; it is they who will triumph;21and their Lord gives them the good news of His mercy and pleas-
ure, Gardens where they will have lasting bliss 22and where they will
remain for ever: truly, there is a tremendous reward with God.
23Believers, do not take your fathers and brothers as allies
a if they
prefer disbelief to faith: those of you who do so are doing wrong.24Say [Prophet], ‘If your fathers, sons, brothers, wives, tribes, the
wealth you have acquired, the trade which you fear will decline, andthe dwellings you love are dearer to you than God and His Messen-ger and the struggle in His cause, then wait until God brings aboutHis punishment.’ God does not guide those who break away. 25God
has helped you [believers] on many battle ﬁelds, even on the day of
the Battle of Hunayn.
b You were well pleased with your large num-
bers, but they were of no use to you: the earth seemed to close in onyou despite its spaciousness, and you turned tail and ﬂed. 26Then
God sent His calm down to His Messenger and the believers, andHe sent down invisible forces. He punished the disbelievers– – this
is what the disbelievers deserve– –27but God turns in His mercy to
whoever He will. God is most forgiving and merciful.
28Believers, those who ascribe partners to God are truly unclean:
do not let them come near the Sacred Mosque after this year. If youare afraid you may become poor, [bear in mind that] God will enrichyou out of His bounty if He pleases: God is all knowing and wise.29Fight those of the People of the Book who do not [truly]
c believe
in God and the Last Day, who do not forbid what God and His
Messenger have forbidden, who do not obey the rule of justice,d
until they pay the taxe and agree to submit.f30The Jews said, ‘Ezra is
aAgainst the Muslims. Cf. 4:144.
bThis took place in a valley between Mecca and Ta ᾿if in the year ah 8 /630 ce .
c‘Truly’ is implied, as it is in many other statements in the Qur ᾿an, e.g. 2:32;8:41;
and65:3.
dThe main meaning of the Arabic dana  is ‘he obeyed’. It also means ‘behave’, and
‘follow a way of life or religion’ ( Qamus  and Lane).
eEtymologically, jizya  means ‘payment in return’, related to jaza ᾿ meaning ‘reward’,
i.e. in return for the protection of the Muslim state with all the accruing bene ﬁts and
exemption from military service, and such taxes on Muslims as zakah . This tax was
levied only on able-bodied free men who could a ﬀord it, and monks were exempted.
The amount was generally low (e.g. one dinar per year).
fCommentators in the past generally understood wa hum saghirun  to mean they
should be humiliated when paying. However, it is clear from the context that they wereunwilling to pay, and the clause simply means they should submit to paying this tax.The Qur ᾿an 9:21 118the son of God,’a and the Christians said, ‘The Messiah is the son of
God’: they said this with their own mouths, repeating what earlierdisbelievers had said. May God confound them! How far astray theyhave been led! 31They take their rabbis and their monks as lords, as
well as Christ, the son of Mary. But they were commanded to serveonly one God: there is no god but Him; He is far above whateverthey set up as His partners! 32They try to extinguish God’s light
with their mouths, but God insists on bringing His light to its full-ness, even if the disbelievers hate it. 33It is He who has sent His
Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth, to show that it isabove all [other] religions, however much the idolaters may hate this.34Believers, many rabbis and monks wrongfully consume people’s
possessions and turn people away from God’s path. [Prophet], tellthose who hoard gold and silver instead of giving in God’s cause thatthey will have a grievous punishment: 35on the Day it is heated up in
Hell’s Fire and used to brand their foreheads, sides, and backs, theywill be told, ‘This is what you hoarded up for yourselves! Now feelthe pain of what you hoarded!’
36God decrees that there are twelve months– – ordained in God’s
Book on the Day when He created the heavens and earth– – four
months of which are sacred:
b this is the correct calculation.c Do not
wrong your souls in these months– – though you may ﬁght the
idolaters at any time,d if they ﬁrst ﬁght you– – remember that God is
with those who are mindful of Him. 37Postponing sacred months
is another act of disobedience by which those who disregard [God]are led astray: they will allow it one year and forbid it in another inorder outwardly to conform with the number of God’s sacredmonths, but in doing so they permit what God has forbidden. Theirevil deeds are made alluring to them: God does not guide those whodisregard [Him].
38Believers, why, when it is said to you, ‘Go and ﬁght in God’s
way,’ do you feel weighed down to the ground? Do you prefer this
aClearly this refers to a certain group who, possibly at the time of the Prophet or
earlier, made this claim.
bThese are Rajab, Dhu ’l-Qa ῾da, Dhu ’l-Hijjah, and Muharram in the Muslim lunar
calendar. Fighting was not allowed during these months (except in self-defence).Cf. 2:194.
cOne of the meanings of din is ‘calculation’ or ‘reckoning’.
dAnother interpretation of kafatan  is ‘all together’.Repentance 119 9:38world to the life to come? How small the enjoyment of this world
is, compared with the life to come! 39If you do not go out and
ﬁght, God will punish you severely and put others in your place,
but you cannot harm Him in any way: God has power over allthings. 40Even if you do not help the Prophet, God helped him
when the disbelievers drove him out: when the two of them
a were
in the cave, he [Muhammad] said to his companion, ‘Do notworry, God is with us,’ and God sent His calm down to him, aidedhim with forces invisible to you, and brought down the dis-believers’ plan. God’s plan is higher: God is almighty and wise.41So go out, no matter whether you are lightly or heavily armed,
and struggle in God’s way with your possessions and your per-sons: this is better for you, if you only knew. 42They would cer-
tainly have followed you [Prophet] if the bene ﬁt was within sight
and the journey short, but the distance seemed too great for them.
They will swear by God, ‘If we could, we certainly would go out
[to battle] with you,’ but they ruin themselves, for God knows thatthey are lying.
43God forgive you [Prophet]! Why did you give them permission
to stay at home before it had become clear to you which of themspoke the truth and which were liars? 44Those who have faith in God
and the Last Day do not ask you for exemption from struggle withtheir possessions and their persons– – God knows exactly who is
mindful of Him– –45only those who do not have faith in God and the
Last Day ask your permission to stay at home: they have doubt intheir hearts and so they waver. 46If they had really wanted to go out
[to battle] with you, they would have made preparations, but Godwas loath to let them rise up and made them hold back. It was said,‘Stay with those who stay behind.’ 47They would only have given
you trouble if they had gone out [to battle] with you: they wouldhave scurried around, trying to sow discord among you, and some ofyou would willingly have listened to them– – God knows exactly who
does evil. 48Indeed, they had tried before that to stir up discord: they
devised plots against you [Prophet] until the truth was exposed andGod’s will triumphed, much to their disgust. 49Some of them said,
‘Give me permission to stay at home: do not trouble me.’ Theyare already in trouble: Hell will engulf the disbelievers. 50If you
aThe Prophet and his companion Abu Bakr.The Qur ᾿an 9:39 120[Prophet] have good fortune, it will grieve them, but if misfortune
comes your way, they will say to themselves, ‘We took precautionsfor this,’ and go away rejoicing. 51Say, ‘Only what God has decreed
will happen to us. He is our Master: let the believers put their trustin God.’ 52Say, ‘Do you expect something other than one of the two
best things to happen to us?
a Well, we expect God to in ﬂict punishment
on you, either from Himself or at our hands. So wait; we too arewaiting.’ 53Say, ‘Whether you give willingly or unwillingly, what you
give will not be accepted, for you are disobedient people.’ 54The only
thing that prevents what they give from being accepted is the factthat they defy God and His Messenger, perform the prayer onlylazily, and give only grudgingly. 55So [Prophet] do not let their
possessions or their children impress you: through these God
intends to punish them in this world and for their souls to departwhile they disbelieve.
56They swear by God that they belong with you [believers], but
they do not. They are cowardly: 57if they could ﬁnd a place of
refuge, or a cave, or somewhere to crawl into, they would run therewith great haste. 58Some of them ﬁnd fault with you [Prophet]
regarding the distribution of alms: they are content if they are givena share, but angry if not. 59If only they would be content with what
God and His Messenger have given them, and say, ‘God is enoughfor us– – He will give us some of His bounty and so will His Messen-
ger–– to God alone we turn in hope.’ 60Alms are meant only for the
poor, the needy, those who administer them, those whose hearts needwinning over, to free slaves and help those in debt, for God’s cause,and for travellers in need. This is ordained by God; God is allknowing and wise.
61There are others who insult the Prophet by saying, ‘He will
listen to anything.’ Say, ‘He listens for your own good: he believes inGod, trusts the believers, and is a mercy for those of you whobelieve.’ An agonizing torment awaits those who insult God’sMessenger. 62They swear by God in order to please you [believers]:
if they were true believers it would be more ﬁtting for them to
please God and His Messenger. 63Do they not know that whoever
opposes God and His Messenger will go to the Fire of Hell and staythere? That is the supreme disgrace.
aVictory or reward in the next world.Repentance 121 9:6364The hypocrites fear that a sura will be revealed exposing what is
in their hearts– – say, ‘Carry on with your jokes: God will bring about
what you fear!’– –65yet if you were to question them, they would be
sure to say, ‘We were just chatting, just amusing ourselves.’ Say,‘Were you making jokes about God, His Revelations, and His Mes-senger? 66Do not try to justify yourselves; you have gone from belief
to disbelief.’ We may forgive some of you, but We will punish others:
they are evildoers. 67The hypocrites, both men and women, are all
the same: they order what is wrong and forbid what is right; they aretight- ﬁsted. They have ignored God, so He has ignored them.
a The
hypocrites are the disobedient ones. 68God promises the Fire of Hell
as a permanent home for the hypocrites, both men and women, andthe disbelievers: this is enough for them. God rejects them and alasting punishment awaits them. 69‘You
b are like those who lived
before you: they were even stronger than you, with more wealth andchildren; they enjoyed their share in this life as you have enjoyedyours; like them, you have indulged in idle talk.’ Their deeds go towaste in this world and the next; it is they who will lose all in the life
to come. 70Have they never heard the stories about their predeces-
sors, the peoples of Noah, ῾Ad, Thamud, Abraham, Midian, and the
ruined cities? Their messengers came to them with clear evidence ofthe truth: God would not deceive them; they deceived themselves.
71The believers, both men and women, support each other; they
order what is right and forbid what is wrong; they keep up the prayer
and pay the prescribed alms; they obey God and His Messenger.God will give His mercy to such people: God is almighty andwise. 72God has promised the believers, both men and women,
Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams where they will remain; good,
peaceful homes in Gardens of lasting bliss; and– – greatest of all– –
God’s good pleasure. That is the supreme triumph.
73Prophet, strive against the disbelievers and the hypocrites,
and be tough with them. Hell is their ﬁnal home– – an evil destin-
ation! 74They swear by God that they did not, but they certainly did
speak words of de ﬁance and became de ﬁant after having sub-
mitted; they tried to do something,
c though they did not achieve it,
aSee note to 7:51.
bAnother example of iltifat : God turns to address them.
cTo harm the Prophet.The Qur ᾿an 9:64 122– –being spiteful was their only response to God and His Messenger
enriching them out of His bounty. They would be better o ﬀ turning
back [to God]: if they turn away, God will punish them in this worldand the Hereafter, and there will be no one on earth to protect orhelp them.
75There are some among them who pledged themselves to God,
saying, ‘If God gives us some of His bounty, we shall certainly give
alms and be righteous,’ 76yet when He did give them some of His
bounty, they became mean and turned obstinately away. 77Because
they broke their promise to God, because of all the lies they told, Hemade hypocrisy settle in their hearts until the Day they meet Him.78Do they not realize that God knows their secrets and their private
discussions? That God knows all that is hidden? 79It is they who
criticize the believers who give freely and those who can only give alittle with great e ﬀort: they sco ﬀ at such people, but it is God who
scoﬀs at them– – a painful punishment awaits them. 80It makes no
diﬀerence [Prophet] whether you ask forgiveness for them or not:
God will not forgive them even if you ask seventy times, becausethey reject God and His Messenger. God does not guide those whorebel against Him.
81Those who were left behind were happy to stay behind when
God’s Messenger set out; they hated the thought of striving in God’sway with their possessions and their persons. They said to oneanother, ‘Do not go [to war] in this heat.’ Say, ‘Hell ﬁre is hotter.’ If
only they understood! 82Let them laugh a little; they will weep a lot
in return for what they have done. 83So [Prophet], if God brings you
back to a group of them, who ask you for permission to go out [tobattle], say, ‘You will never go out and ﬁght an enemy with me: you
chose to sit at home the ﬁrst time, so remain with those who stay
behind now.’
84Do not hold prayers for any of them if they die, and do not stand
by their graves: they disbelieved in God and His Messenger and diedrebellious. 85Do not let their possessions and their children impress
you: God means to punish them through these in this world, andthat their souls should depart while they disbelieve. 86When a sura is
revealed [saying], ‘Believe in God and strive hard alongside HisMessenger,’ their wealthy ask your permission [to be exempt], saying,‘Allow us to stay behind with the others’: 87they prefer to be with
those who stay behind. Their hearts have been sealed: they do notRepentance
123 9:87comprehend. 88But the Messenger and those who believe with him
strive hard with their possessions and their persons. The best thingsbelong to them; it is they who will prosper. 89God has prepared
Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams for them and there they will
stay. That is the supreme triumph.
90Some of the desert Arabs, too, came to make excuses, asking to
be granted exemption. Those who lied to God and His Messenger
stayed behind at home. A painful punishment will a ﬄict those of
them who disbelieved, 91but there is no blame attached to the weak,
the sick, and those who have no means to spend, provided they aretrue to God and His Messenger– – there is no reason to reproach
those who do good: God is most forgiving and merciful. 92And there
is no blame attached to those who came to you [Prophet] for ridinganimals and to whom you said, ‘I cannot ﬁnd a mount for you’: they
turned away with their eyes over ﬂowing with tears of grief that they
had nothing they could contribute. 93The ones open to blame are
those who asked you for exemption despite their wealth, and whopreferred to be with those who stay behind. God has sealed theirhearts: they do not understand.
94When you return from the expedition they will carry on coming
to you [believers] with excuses. Say, ‘Do not make excuses. We donot believe you: God has told us about you. God and His Messengerwill watch your actions now, and in the end you will be returned tothe One who knows the seen and the unseen. He will confront youwith what you have done.’ 95When you return to them, they will
swear to you by God in order to make you leave them alone– – so leave
them alone: they are loathsome, and Hell will be their home as areward for their actions– –96they will swear to you in order to make
you accept them, but even if you do accept them, God will not acceptpeople who rebel against Him.
97The desert Arabs are the most stubborn of all peoples in their
disbelief and hypocrisy. They are the least likely to recognize thelimits that God has sent down to His Messenger. God is all knowingand all wise. 98Some of the desert Arabs consider what they give to
be an imposition; they are waiting for fortune to turn against you,but fortune will turn against them. God is all hearing and all know-ing. 99But there are also some desert Arabs who believe in God and
the Last Day and consider their contributions as bringing themnearer to God and the prayers of the Messenger: they will indeedThe Qur ᾿an 9:88 124bring them nearer and God will admit them to His mercy. God is
most forgiving and merciful.
100God will be well pleased with the ﬁrst emigrants and helpersa
and those who followed them in good deeds, and they will be well
pleased with Him: He has prepared Gardens graced with ﬂowing
streams for them, there to remain for ever. That is the supremetriumph.
101Some of the desert Arabs around you are hypocrites, as are
some of the people of Medina– – they are obstinate in their hypocrisy.
You [Prophet] do not know them, but We know them well: We shall
punish them twice and then they will be returned to [face] a painful
punishment [in the Hereafter]. 102And there are others who have
confessed their wrongdoing, who have done some righteous deedsand some bad ones: God may well accept their repentance, for Godis most forgiving and merciful. 103In order to cleanse and purify
them [Prophet], accept
b a gift out of their property [to make amends]
and pray for them– – your prayer will be a comfort to them. God is all
hearing, all knowing. 104Do they not know that it is God Himself
who accepts repentance from His servants and receives what is givenfreely for His sake? He is always ready to accept repentance,most merciful. 105Say [Prophet], ‘Take action! God will see your
actions– – as will His Messenger and the believers– – and then you will
be returned to Him who knows what is seen and unseen, and He willtell you what you have been doing. 106And there are others who are
waiting for God’s decree, either to punish them or to show themmercy. God is all knowing and wise.
107Then there are those who built a mosque
c– –in an attempt to
cause harm, disbelief, and disunity among the believers– –as an out-
post for those who fought God and His Messenger before: theyswear, ‘Our intentions were nothing but good,’ but God bears wit-ness that they are liars. 108[Prophet], never pray in that mosque. You
should rather pray in a mosque founded from its ﬁrst day on con-
sciousness of God: in this mosque there are men who desire to growin purity– – God loves those who seek to purify themselves. 109Which
is better, the person who founds his building on consciousness of
aThe Medinan Muslims who welcomed and supported the emigrants from Mecca.
bLiterally ‘take’.
cAbu ῾Amir al-Rahib told the hypocrites to build a rival mosque in order to sow
dissension in the community.Repentance 125 9:109God and desire for His good pleasure, or the person who founds his
building on the brink of a crumbling precipice that will tumble downinto the Fire of Hell, taking him with it? God does not guide theevildoers: 110the building they have founded will always be a source
of doubt within their hearts, until their hearts are cut to pieces. Godis all knowing and wise.
111God has purchased the persons and possessions of the believers
in return for the Garden– – they ﬁght in God’s way: they kill and are
killed– – this is a true promise given by Him in the Torah, the Gospel,
and the Qur ᾿an. Who could be more faithful to his promise than
God? So be happy with the bargain you have made: that is thesupreme triumph. 112[The believers are] those who turn to God in
repentance; who worship and praise Him; who bow down and pros-trate themselves; who order what is good and forbid what is wrongand who observe God’s limits. Give glad news to such believers.
113It is not ﬁtting for the Prophet and the believers to ask forgive-
ness for the idolaters– – even if they are related to them– – after having
been shown that they are the inhabitants of the Blaze: 114Abraham
asked forgiveness for his father because he had made a promise tohim, but once he realized that his father was an enemy of God, hewashed his hands of him. Abraham was tender-hearted and forbear-ing. 115God would not condemn for going astray those He has
already guided [to the faith] before making entirely clear to themwhat they should avoid.
a God has knowledge of everything; 116con-
trol of the heavens and earth belongs to God; He alone gives life anddeath; you have no ally or helper other than Him.
117In His mercy God has turned to the Prophet, and the emigrants
and helpers who followed him in the hour of adversity when somehearts almost wavered: He has turned to them; He is most kind andmerciful to them. 118And to the three men who stayed behind: when
the earth, for all its spaciousness, closed in around them, when theirvery souls closed in around them, when they realized that the onlyrefuge from God was with Him, He turned to them in mercy inorder for them to return [to Him]. God is the Ever Relenting, theMost Merciful.
119You who believe, be mindful of God: stand with those who are
aThis reassured the Muslims who had been praying for their disbelieving ancestors
that they would not be blamed for having done this.The Qur ᾿an 9:110 126true. 120The people of Medina and their neighbouring desert Arabs
should not have held back from following God’s Messenger, norshould they have cared about themselves more than him: if ever theysuﬀer any thirst, weariness, or hunger in God’s cause, take any step that
angers the disbelievers, or cause any harm to an enemy, a good deedis recorded in their favour on account of it– – God never wastes the
reward of those who do good– –121if they spend a little or a lot for
God’s cause, if they traverse a mountain pass, all this is recorded to
their credit so that God can reward them in accordance with the bestof their deeds.
122Yet it is not right for all the believers to go out [to battle]
together: out of each community, a group should go out to gainunderstanding of the religion, so that they can teach their peoplewhen they return and so that they can guard themselves against evil.123You who believe, ﬁght the disbelievers near you and let them ﬁnd
you standing ﬁrm: be aware that God is with those who are mindful
of Him.
124When a sura is revealed, some [hypocrites] say, ‘Have any of you
been strengthened in faith by it?’ It certainly does strengthen thefaith of those who believe and they rejoice, 125but, as for the perverse
at heart, each new sura adds further to their perversity. They diedisbelieving. 126Can they not see that they are a ﬄicted once or twice
a year? Yet they neither repent nor take heed. 127Whenever a sura is
revealed, they look at each other and say, ‘Is anyone watching you?’and then they turn away– – God has turned their hearts away because
they are people who do not use their reason.
128A Messenger has come to you from among yourselves. Your
suﬀering distresses him: he is deeply concerned for you and full of
kindness and mercy towards the believers. 129If they turn away,
[Prophet], say ,‘God is enough for me: there is no god but Him; I putmy trust in Him; He is the Lord of the Mighty Throne.’Repentance
127 9:12910. JONAH
A Meccan sura which takes its title from the reference to Jonah in verse 98. It
stresses God’s power, the authenticity of the Qur ᾿an, and the fate of evildoers.
God’s anger at those who consistently deny the truth of His revelations andsigns is made clear, as is the fact that, were it not for His decision to await theDay of Resurrection, His judgement would already have fallen upon them.The Prophet is encouraged to be patient and reminded of the fact that he cannotforce people to believe.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Alif Lam Ra
These are the verses of the wisea Book. 2Is it so surprising to people
that We have revealed to a man from among them that he shouldwarn people, and give glad news to those who believe, that they areon a sure footing with their Lord? [Yet] those who disbelieve say,‘This man is clearly a sorcerer.’
3Your Lord is God who created the heavens and earth in six
Days,
b then established Himself on the Throne, governing every-
thing; there is no one that can intercede with Him, unless He has
ﬁrst given permission: this is God your Lord so worship Him. How
can you not take heed? 4It is to Him you shall all return– –that is a
true promise from God. It was He who created [you] in the ﬁrst
place, and He will do so again, so that He may justly reward thosewho believe and do good deeds. But the disbelievers will have a drink
of scalding water, and agonizing torment, because they persistently
disbelieved.
5It is He who made the sun a shining radiance and the moon a
light, determining phases for it so that you might know the number
of years and how to calculate time. God did not create all thesewithout a true purpose; He explains His signs to those who under-stand. 6In the succession of night and day, and in what God created
aHakim  is understood in various ways: to mean ‘full of wisdom’, to suggest that it
gives decisions on matters, and to convey that it is perfected and well formed.
bNot the sort of days we know– –see 32:5;70:4.in the heavens and earth, there truly are signs for those who are
aware of Him. 7Those who do not expecta to meet Us and are
pleased with the life of this world, contenting themselves with it andpaying no heed to Our signs, 8shall have the Fire for their home
because of what they used to do. 9But as for those who believe and do
good deeds, their Lord will guide them because of their faith.Streams will ﬂow at their feet in the Gardens of Bliss. 10Their prayer
in them will be, ‘Glory be to You, God!’ their greeting, ‘Peace,’ and
the last part of their prayer, ‘Praise be to God, Lord of the Worlds.’
11If God were to hasten on for people the harm [they have earned]
as they wish to hasten on the good, their time would already be up.But We leave those who do not expect to meet Us to wander blindlyin their excesses. 12When trouble befalls man he cries out to Us,
whether lying on his side, sitting, or standing, but as soon as Werelieve him of his trouble he goes on his way as if he had never criedout to Us to remove his trouble. In this way the deeds of suchheedless people are made attractive to them. 13Before you people, We
destroyed whole generations when they did evil– – their messengers
brought them clear signs but they refused to believe. This is how Werepay the guilty. 14Later We made you their successors in the land, to
see how you would behave.
15When Our clear revelations are recited to them, those who do
not expect to meet with Us say, ‘Bring [us] a di ﬀerent Qur ᾿an, or
change it.’ [Prophet], say, ‘It is not for me to change it of my ownaccord; I only follow what is revealed to me, for I fear the torment ofan awesome Day, if I were to disobey my Lord.’ 16Say, ‘If God had so
willed, I would not have recited it to you, nor would He have made itknown to you. I lived a whole lifetime among you before it came tome. How can you not use your reason?’
17Who could be more wicked than someone who invents lies
against God or denies His revelations? The guilty will never prosper.18They worship alongside God things that can neither harm nor
beneﬁt them, and say, ‘These are our intercessors
b with God.’ Say,
‘Do you think you can tell God about something He knows not toexist in the heavens or earth? Glory be to Him! He is far above thepartner-gods they associate with Him! 19All people were originally
aOr ‘fear’ (one of the meanings of yarjuna ).
bSee above, verse 3.Jonah 129 10:19one single community, but later they di ﬀered. If it had not been for a
worda from your Lord, the preordained judgement would already
have been passed between them regarding their di ﬀerences. 20They
say, ‘Why has no miraculous sign been sent down to him from hisLord?’ Say [Prophet], ‘Only God knows the unseen, so wait– – I too
am waiting.’ 21No sooner do We let people taste some mercy after
some hardship has a ﬄicted them, than they begin to scheme against
Our revelations. Say, ‘God schemes even faster.’ Our messengers
b
record all your scheming.
22It is He who enables you to travel on land and sea until, when
you are sailing on ships and rejoicing in the favouring wind, a storm
arrives: waves come at those on board from all sides and they feel
there is no escape. Then they pray to God, professing sincere devo-tion to Him, ‘If You save us from this we shall be truly thankful.’23Yet no sooner does He save them than, back on land, they behave
outrageously against all that is right. People! Your outrageousbehaviour only works against yourselves. Take your little enjoymentin this present life; in the end you will return to Us and We shallconfront you with everything you have done.
24The life of this world is like this: rain that We send down from
the sky is absorbed by the plants of the earth, from which humansand animals eat. But when the earth has taken on its ﬁnest appear-
ance, and adorns itself, and its people think they have power over it,then the fate We commanded comes to it, by night or by day, and Wereduce it to stubble, as if it had not ﬂourished just the day before.
This is the way We explain the revelations for those who re ﬂect.
25But God invites [everyone] to the Home of Peace, and guides
whoever He will to a straight path. 26Those who did well will have
the best reward and more besides. Neither darkness nor shame willcover their faces: these are the companions in Paradise, and therethey will remain. 27As for those who did evil, each evil deed will be
requited by its equal and humiliation will cover them– – no one will
protect them against God– – as though their faces were covered with
veils cut from the darkness of the night. These are the inmates of theFire, and there they shall remain.
28On the Day We gather them all together, We shall say to those
who associate partners with God, ‘Stay in your place, you and your
aPostponing judgement.bAngels.The Qur ᾿an 10:20 130partner-gods.’ Then We shall separate them, and their partner-gods
will say, ‘It was not us you worshipped– –29God is witness enough
between us and you– – we had no idea that you worshipped us.’
30Every soul will realize, then and there, what it did in the past. They
will be returned to God, their rightful Lord, and their invented[gods] will desert them.
31Say [Prophet], ‘Who provides for you from the sky and the
earth? Who controls hearing and sight? Who brings forth the livingfrom the dead and the dead from the living, and who governs every-
thing?’ They are sure to say, ‘God.’ Then say, ‘So why do you not
take heed of Him? 32That is God, your Lord, the Truth. Apart from
the Truth, what is there except error? So how is it that you are
dissuaded?’ 33In this way, your Lord’s word about those who defy
[the Truth] has been proved– – they do not believe. 34Ask them, ‘Can
any of your partner-gods originate creation, then bring it back to lifeagain in the end?’ Say, ‘It is God that originates creation, and thenbrings it back to life, so how can you be misled?’ 35Say, ‘Can any of
your partner-gods show the way to the Truth?’ Say, ‘God shows theway to the Truth. Is someone who shows the way to the Truth moreworthy to be followed, or someone who cannot ﬁnd the way unless
he himself is shown? What is the matter with you? How do you
judge?’ 36Most of them follow nothing but assumptions, but assump-
tions can be of no value at all against the Truth: God is well aware ofwhat they do.
37Nor could this Qur ᾿an have been devised by anyone other than
God. It is a con ﬁrmation of what was revealed before it and an
explanation of the Scripture– – let there be no doubt about it– – it is
from the Lord of the Worlds. 38Or do they say, ‘He has devised it’?
Say, ‘Then produce a sura like it, and call on anyone you can besideGod if you are telling the truth.’ 39But they are denying what they
cannot comprehend– – its prophecy has yet to be ful ﬁlled for them. In
the same way, those before them refused to believe– – see what was
the end of those evildoers!
40Some of them believe in it, and some do not: your Lord knows
best those who cause corruption. 41If they do not believe you,
[Prophet], say, ‘I act for myself, and you for yourselves. You are notresponsible for my actions nor am I responsible for yours.’ 42Some of
them do listen to you: but can you make the deaf hear if they will notuse their minds? 43Some of them look at you: but can you guide theJonah
131 10:43blind if they will not see? 44God does not wrong people at all– – it is
they who wrong themselves.
45On the Day He gathers them together, it will be as if they have
stayed [in the world] no longer than a single hour, and they willrecognize one another. Those who denied the meeting with God willbe the losers, for they did not follow the right guidance. 46Whether
We let you [Prophet] see some of the punishment We have threat-
ened them with, or cause you to die [ ﬁrst], they will return to Us:
God is witness to what they do. 47Every community is sent a mes-
senger, and when their messenger comes,
a they will be judged justly;
they will not be wronged. 48They ask, ‘When will this promise be
fulﬁlled, if what you say is true?’ 49Say [Prophet], ‘I cannot control
any harm or bene ﬁt that comes to me, except as God wills. There is
an appointed term for every community, and when it is reached theycan neither delay nor hasten it, even for a moment.’ 50Say, ‘Think: if
His punishment were to come to you, during the night or day,what part of it would the guilty wish to hasten? 51Will you believe in
it, when it actually happens?’ It will be said, ‘Now [you believe],
when [before] you sought to hasten it?’ 52It will be said to the evil-
doers, ‘Taste lasting punishment. Why should you be rewarded foranything but what you did?’
53They ask you [Prophet], ‘Is it true?’ Say, ‘Yes, by my Lord, it is
true, and you cannot escape it.’ 54Every soul that has done evil, if it
possessed all that is on the earth, would gladly o ﬀer it as ransom.
When they see the punishment, they will repent in secret, but they
will be judged with justice and will not be wronged. 55It is to God
that everything in the heavens and the earth truly belongs: God’spromise is true, but most people do not realize it. 56It is He who gives
life and takes it, and you will all be returned to Him.
57People, a teaching from your Lord has come to you, a healing for
what is in [your] hearts, and guidance and mercy for the believers.
58Say [Prophet], ‘In God’s grace and mercy let them rejoice: these
are better than all they accumulate.’ 59Say, ‘Think about the provision
God has sent down for you, some of which you have made unlawfuland some lawful.’
b Say, ‘Has God given you permission [to do this],
or are you inventing lies about God?’ 60What will those people who
aAt the Judgement. The messengers will bear witness, see 39:69.
bSee5:103.The Qur ᾿an 10:44 132invent lies about Him think on the Day of Resurrection? God is
bountiful towards people, but most of them do not give thanks.
61In whatever matter you [Prophet] may be engaged and whatever
part of the Qur ᾿an you are reciting, whatever work you [people] are
doing, We witness you when you are engaged in it. Not even theweight of a speck of dust in the earth or sky escapes your Lord, noranything lesser or greater: it is all written in a clear record. 62But for
those who are on God’s side there is no fear, nor shall they grieve.63For those who believe and are conscious of God, 64for them there is
good news in this life and in the Hereafter– – there is no changing the
promises of God– – that is truly the supreme triumph. 65Do not let
their words grieve you [Prophet]. Power belongs entirely to God; He
hears all and knows all; 66indeed, all who are in the heavens and on
the earth belong to Him. Those who call upon others beside God arenot really following partner-gods; they are only following assump-tions and telling lies. 67It is He who made the night so that you can
rest in it and the daylight so that you can see– – there truly are signs
in this for those who hear.
68They say, ‘God has children!’ May He be exalted! He is the
Self-Su ﬃcient One; everything in the heavens and the earth
belongs to Him. You have no authority to say this. How dare you say
things about God without any knowledge? 69Say [Prophet], ‘Those
who invent lies about God will not prosper.’ 70They may have
a little enjoyment in this world, but then they will return to Us.Then We shall make them taste severe punishment for persisting inblasphemy.
71Tell them the story of Noah. He said to his people, ‘My people,
if my presence among you and my reminding you of God’s signs istoo much for you, then I put my trust in God. Agree on your courseof action, you and your partner-gods– – do not be hesitant or secret-
ive about it– – then carry out your decision on me and give me no
respite. 72But if you turn away, I have asked no reward from you; my
reward is with God alone, and I am commanded to be one of thosewho devote themselves to Him.’ 73But they rejected him. We saved
him and those with him on the Ark and let them survive; and We
drowned those who denied Our revelations– – see what was the end
of those who were forewarned!
74Then, after him, We sent messengers to their peoples bringing
them clear signs. But they would not believe in anything they hadJonah
133 10:74already rejected: in this way We seal the hearts of those who are full
of hostility. 75After them We sent Moses and Aaron with Our signs
to Pharaoh and his leading supporters, but they acted arrogantly– –
they were wicked people. 76When the truth came to them from Us,
they said, ‘This is blatant sorcery.’ 77Moses said, ‘Is this what you say
about the Truth when it comes to you? Is this sorcery? Sorcerersnever prosper.’ 78They said, ‘Have you come to turn us away from
the faith we found our fathers following, so that you and yourbrother can gain greatness in this land? We will never believe in you.’
79And Pharaoh said, ‘Bring me every learned sorcerer.’ 80When the
sorcerers came, Moses said to them, ‘Throw down whatever youhave.’
a81When they did so, Moses said, ‘Everything you have
brought is sorcery and God will show it to be false. God does notmake the work of mischief-makers right; 82He will uphold the Truth
with His words, even if the evildoers hate it.’ 83But no one believed
in Moses except a few of his own people, for fear that Pharaoh andtheir leaders would persecute them: Pharaoh was domineering in theland and prone to excess.
84Moses said, ‘My people, if you have faith in God and are
devoted to Him, put your trust in Him.’ 85They said, ‘We have put
our trust in God. Lord! Do not make us an object of persecution forthe oppressors. 86Save us, in Your mercy, from those who reject
[Your message].’ 87We revealed to Moses and his brother: ‘House
your people in Egypt and make these houses places of worship; keepup the prayer; give good news to the believers!’ 88And Moses said,
‘Our Lord, You have given Pharaoh and his chiefs splendour andwealth in this present life and here they are, Lord, leading othersastray from Your path. Our Lord, obliterate their wealth and hardentheir hearts so that they do not believe until they see the agonizingtorment.’ 89God said, ‘Your prayers are answered, so stay on the
right course, and do not follow the path of those who do not know.’
90We took the Children of Israel across the sea. Pharaoh and his
troops pursued them in arrogance and aggression. But as he was
drowning he cried, ‘I believe there is no God except the one the
Children of Israel believe in. I submit to Him.’ 91‘Now? When you
had always been a rebel, and a troublemaker! 92Today We shall save
only your corpse as a sign to all posterity. A great many people fail to
aYour sticks or sta ﬀs–– see 20:66–9.The Qur ᾿an 10:75 134heed Our signs.’ 93We settled the Children of Israel in a good place
and provided good things as sustenance for them. It was only afterknowledge had come to them that they began to di ﬀer among them-
selves. Your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrec-tion regarding their di ﬀerences.
94So if you [Prophet] are in doubt about what We have revealed to
you, ask those who have been reading the scriptures before you.
The Truth has come to you from your Lord, so be in no doubtand do not deny God’s signs– –95then you would become one of the
losers. 96Those against whom your Lord’s sentence is passed will
not believe, 97even if every sign comes to them, until they see the
agonizing torment. 98If only a single town had believed and bene-
ﬁted from its belief! Only Jonah’s people did so, and when they
believed, We relieved them of the punishment of disgrace in the lifeof this world, and let them enjoy life for a time. 99Had your Lord
willed, all the people on earth would have believed. So can you[Prophet] compel people to believe? 100No soul can believe except by
God’s will, and He brings disgrace on those who do not use theirreason. 101Say, ‘Look at what is in the heavens and on the earth.’ But
what use are signs and warnings to people who will not believe?102What are they waiting for but the punishment that came to those
before them? Say, ‘Wait then, I am waiting too.’ 103In the end We
shall save Our messengers and the believers. We take it upon Ourselfto save the believers.
104[Prophet] say, ‘People, even if you are in doubt about my
religion, I do not worship those you worship other than God, but Iworship God who will cause you to die, and I am commanded to be abeliever.’ 105[Prophet], set your face towards religion as a man of pure
faith. Do not be one of those who join partners with God; 106do not
pray to any other [god] that can neither bene ﬁt nor harm you: if you
do, you will be one of the evildoers. 107If God in ﬂicts harm on you,
no one can remove it but Him, and if He intends good for you, noone can turn His bounty away; He grants His bounty to any of Hisservants He will. He is the Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful.108Say, ‘People, the Truth has come to you from your Lord. Whoever
follows the right path follows it for his own good, and whoever straysdoes so to his own loss: I am not your guardian.’ 109[Prophet], follow
what is being revealed to you, and be steadfast until God gives Hisjudgement, for He is the Best of Judges.Jonah
135 10:10911. HUD
A Meccan sura named after the prophet Hud whose story is given in verses 50–60.
It begins by announcing that the Prophet is sent both to warn and to give goodnews, and the body of the sura focuses on the warning aspect: God watches overeverything and is aware of all that people do (verses 5–6,111–12,123). The
many stories of past prophets, which serve to warn the disbelievers, alsostrengthen the heart of the Prophet (verse 120).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Alif Lam Ra
[This is] a Scripture whose verses are perfected, then set out clearly,
from One who is all wise, all aware. 2[Say, Prophet], ‘Worship no one
but God. I am sent to you from Him to warn and to give good news.3Ask your Lord for forgiveness, then turn back to Him. He will
grant you wholesome enjoyment until an appointed time, and give
His grace to everyone who has merit. But if you turn away, I fear youwill have torment on a terrible Day: 4it is to God that you will all
return, and He has power over everything.’
5See how they [the disbelievers] wrap themselves up, to hide their
feelings from Him. But even when they cover themselves with their
clothes, He knows what they conceal and what they reveal: He knowswell the innermost secrets of the heart. 6There is not a creature that
moves on earth whose provision is not His concern. He knows whereit lives and its [ ﬁnal] resting place: it is all [there] in a clear record.
7It is He who created the heavens and the earth in six Days
a– –His
ruleb extends over the watersc too– –so as to test which of you does
best.
Yet [Prophet], if you say to them, ‘You will be resurrected after
death,’ the disbelievers are sure to answer, ‘This is clearly nothingbut sorcery.’ 8If We defer their punishment for a determined time,
aSee also 22:47;32:4;41:9ﬀ.
b‘Rule’ is one of the meanings of the Arabic word ῾arsh, normally translated as
‘throne’ ( al-Mu ῾jam al-Wasit ).
cCf. 21:30.they are sure to say, ‘What is holding it back?’ But on the Day it
comes upon them, nothing will divert it from them; what theymocked will be all around them. 9How desperate and ungrateful
man becomes when We let him taste Our mercy and then withholdit!10And if We let him taste mercy after some harm has touched him,
he is sure to say, ‘Misfortune has gone away from me.’ He becomesexultant and boastful. 11Not so those who are steadfast and do good
deeds: they will have forgiveness and a great reward.
12So [Prophet] are you going to
a abandon some part of what is
revealed to you, and let your heart be oppressed by it, because theysay, ‘Why is no treasure sent down to him? Why has no angel come
with him?’? You are only there to warn; it is God who is in charge of
everything. 13If they say, ‘He has invented it himself,’ say, ‘Then
produce ten invented suras like it, and call in whoever you can besideGod, if you are truthful.’ 14If they do not answer you, then you will
all know that it is sent down containing knowledge from God, andthat there is no god but Him. Then will you submit to Him? 15If any
desire [only] the life of this world with all its ﬁnery, We shall repay
them in full in this life for their deeds– – they will be given no less– –
16but such people will have nothing in the Hereafter but the Fire:
their work here will be fruitless and their deeds futile. 17Can they be
compared to those who have clear proof from their Lord,
b recited
by a witness from Him,c and before it the Book of Moses, as a guide
and mercy? These people believe in it, whereas those groups thatdeny its truth are promised the Fire. So have no doubt about it[Prophet]: it is the Truth from your Lord, though most people donot believe so.
18Who could do more wrong than someone who invents lies about
God? Such people will be brought before their Lord, and the wit-nesses will say, ‘These are the ones that lied about their Lord.’ God’srejection is the due of those who do such wrong, 19who hinder others
from God’s path, trying to make it crooked, and deny the life to
come. 20They will not escape on earth, and there will be no one other
than God to protect them. Their punishment will be doubled. Theycould not hear, and they did not see. 21It is they who will have lost
aLiterally ‘Perhaps you will . . .’, but this is a challenging ﬁgure of speech.
bThe Qur ᾿an.
cThe Angel Gabriel, see 4:166.Hud 137 11:21their souls, and what they invented will have deserted them. 22There
is no doubt they will be the ones to lose most in the life to come.23But those who believed, did good deeds, and humbled themselves
before their Lord will be companions in Paradise and there they willstay. 24These two groups are like the blind and the deaf as compared
with those who can see and hear well: can they be alike? How can younot take heed?
25We sent Noah to his people to say, ‘I have come to you to give a
clear warning: 26worship no one but God. I fear you will have tor-
ment on a painful Day.’ 27But the prominent disbelievers among his
people said, ‘We can see that you are nothing but a mortal like
ourselves, and it is clear to see that only the vilest among us followyou. We cannot see how you are any better than we are. In fact, we
think you are a liar.’ 28He said, ‘My people, think: if I did have a clear
sign from my Lord, and He had given me grace of His own, thoughit was hidden from you, could we force you to accept it against yourwill? 29My people, I ask no reward for it from you; my reward comes
only from God. I will not drive away the faithful: they are sure to
meet their Lord. I can see you are foolish. 30My people, who could
help me against God if I drove the faithful away? Will you not takeheed? 31I am not telling you that I hold God’s treasures, or have any
knowledge of what is hidden, or that I am an angel. Nor do I say thatGod will not grant any good to those who are despised in your eyes:God Himself knows best what is in their souls. If I did this I wouldbe one of the wrongdoers.’ 32They said, ‘Noah! You have argued
with us for too long. Bring down on us the punishment you threatenus with, if you are telling the truth.’ 33He said, ‘It is God who will
bring it down, if He wishes, and you will not be able to escape. 34My
advice will be no use to you if God wishes to leave you to yourdelusions: He is your Lord and to Him you will be returned.’
35If [these disbelievers]
a say, ‘He has made this up,’ say
[Muhammad], ‘If I have made this up, I am responsible for my own
crime, but I am innocent of the crimes you commit.’
36It was revealed to Noah, ‘None of your people will believe,
other than those who have already done so, so do not be distressed by,
what they do. 37Build the Ark under Our [watchful] eyes and with
Our inspiration. Do not plead with Me for those who have done
aIn Mecca.The Qur ᾿an 11:22 138evil–– they will be drowned.’ 38So he began to build the Ark, and
whenever leaders of his people passed by, they laughed at him. Hesaid, ‘You may scorn us now, but we will come to scorn you: 39you
will ﬁnd out who will receive a humiliating punishment, and on
whom a lasting su ﬀering will descend.’ 40When Our command came,
and water gushed up
a out of the earth, We said, ‘Place on board this
Ark a pair of each species, and your own family– – except those
against whom the sentence has already been passed– – and those who
have believed,’ though only a few believed with him. 41He said,
‘Board the Ark. In the name of God it shall sail and anchor. My Godis most forgiving and merciful.’ 42It sailed with them on waves like
mountains, and Noah called out to his son, who stayed behind,‘Come aboard with us, my son, do not stay with the disbelievers.’43But he replied, ‘I will seek refuge on a mountain to save me
from the water.’ Noah said, ‘Today there is no refuge from God’s
command, except for those on whom He has mercy.’ The waves cut
them o ﬀ from each other and he was among the drowned.
44Then it was said, ‘Earth, swallow up your water, and sky, hold
back,’ and the water subsided, the command was ful ﬁlled. The Ark
settled on Mount Judi, and it was said, ‘Gone are those evildoingpeople!’ 45Noah called out to his Lord, saying, ‘My Lord, my son
was one of my family, though Your promise
b is true, and You are the
most just of all judges.’ 46God said, ‘Noah, he was not one of your
family. What he did was not right. Do not ask Me for things youknow nothing about. I am warning you not to be foolish.’ 47He said,
‘My Lord, I take refuge with You from asking for things I knownothing about. If You do not forgive me, and have mercy on me, Ishall be one of the losers.’ 48And it was said, ‘Noah, descend in peace
from Us, with blessings on you and on some of the communities that
will spring from those who are with you. There will be others Wewill allow to enjoy life for a time, but then a painful punishment from
Us will a ﬄict them.’ 49These accounts are part of what was beyond
your knowledge [Muhammad]. We revealed them to you. Neitheryou nor your people knew them before now, so be patient: the futurebelongs to those who are aware of God.
50To the ῾Ad, We sent their brother, Hud. He said, ‘My people,
aLiterally ‘the furnace boiled over’.
bTo save Noah’s family; see verse 40.Hud 139 11:50worship God. You have no god other than Him; you are only making
up lies. 51I ask no reward from you, my people; my reward comes
only from Him who created me. Why do you not use your reason?52My people, ask forgiveness from your Lord, and return to Him. He
will send down for you rain in abundance from the sky, and give youextra strength. Do not turn away and be lost in your sins.’ 53They
replied, ‘Hud, you have not brought us any clear evidence. We will
not forsake our gods on the strength of your word alone, nor will webelieve in you. 54All we can say is that one of our gods may have
inﬂicted some harm on you.’ He said, ‘I call God to witness, and you
too are my witnesses, that I disown those you set up as partners withGod. 55So plot against me, all of you, and give me no respite. 56I put
my trust in God, my Lord and your Lord. There is no moving
creature which He does not control.
a My Lord’s way is straight.
57But if you turn away, then I have conveyed the message with which
I was sent to you, and my Lord will bring along another people inyour place. You cannot do Him any harm: it is my Lord who protectseverything.’ 58And so, when Our judgement came to pass, by Our
grace We saved Hud and his fellow believers. We saved them from a
severe punishment. 59These were the ῾Ad: they rejected their Lord’s
signs, disobeyed His messengers, and followed the command ofevery obstinate tyrant. 60They were rejected in this life and so
they shall be on the Day of Judgement. Yes, the ῾Ad denied their
Lord– – so away with the ῾Ad, the people of Hud!
61To the Thamud, We sent their brother, Salih. He said, ‘My
people, worship God. You have no god other than Him. It was Hewho brought you into being from the earth and made you inhabit it,so ask forgiveness from Him, and turn back to Him: my Lord is near,and ready to answer.’ 62They said, ‘Salih, We used to have such great
hope in you. Will you forbid us to worship what our fathers wor-shipped? We are in grave doubt about what you are asking us to do.’63He said, ‘My people, just think: if I did have clear proof from my
Lord, and if He had given me mercy of His own, who could protectme from God if I disobeyed Him? You would only make my lossgreater. 64My people, this camel belongs to God, a sign for you, so
leave it to pasture on God’s earth and do not harm it, or youwill soon be punished.’ 65But they hamstrung it, so he said, ‘Enjoy
aLiterally ‘grasp by its forelock’.The Qur ᾿an 11:51 140lifea for another three days: 66this warning will not prove false.’ And
so, when Our command was ful ﬁlled, by Our mercy We saved Salih
and his fellow believers from the disgrace of that day. [Prophet], it isyour Lord who is the Strong, the Mighty One. 67The blast struck the
evildoers and they lay dead in their homes, 68as though they had
never lived and ﬂourished there. Yes, the Thamud denied their
Lord– – so away with the Thamud!
69To Abraham Our messengers brought good news. They said,
‘Peace.’ He answered, ‘Peace,’ and without delay he brought in a
roasted calf. 70When he saw that their hands did not reach towards
the meal, he found this strange and became afraid of them. But theysaid, ‘Do not be afraid. We have been sent against the people of Lot.’
71His wife was standing [nearby] and laughed. We gave her good
news of Isaac and, after him, of Jacob. 72She said, ‘Alas for me! How
am I to bear a child when I am an old woman, and my husband hereis an old man? That would be a strange thing!’ 73They said, ‘Are you
astonished at what God ordains? The grace of God and His blessingsbe upon you, people of this house! For He is worthy of all praise andglory.’ 74Then, when the fear left Abraham and the good news came
to him, he pleaded with Us for Lot’s people, 75for Abraham was
forbearing, tender-hearted, and devout. 76‘Abraham, cease your
pleading: what your Lord has ordained has come about; punishment
is coming to them, which cannot be turned back.’
77And when Our messengers came to Lot, he was anxious for
them, feeling powerless to protect them, and said, ‘This is a trulyterrible day!’ 78His people came rushing towards him; they used to
commit foul deeds. He said, ‘My people, here are my daughters.
b
They are more wholesome for you, so have some fear of God and donot disgrace me with my guests. Is there not a single right-mindedman among you?’ 79They said, ‘You know very well that we have no
right to your daughters. You know very well what we want.’ 80He
said, ‘If only I had the strength to stop you or could rely on strongsupport!’ 81They [the messengers] said, ‘Lot, we are your Lord’s
messengers. They will not reach you. Leave with your householdin the dead of night, and let none of you turn back. Only your wife
aLiterally ‘continue to live in your homes’.
bSome commentators interpret this to refer to the daughters of his people, rather
than the prophet’s own daughters.Hud 141 11:81will su ﬀer the fate that befalls the others. Their appointed time is the
morning: is the morning not near?’ 82And so when what We had
ordained came about, We turned their town upside down and raineddown stones of baked clay on it, layer upon layer, 83marked from
your Lord. It is not far from the evildoers.
a
84And to Midian, We sent their brother Shu ῾ayb. He said, ‘My
people, worship God. You have no god other than Him. Do not giveshort measure nor short weight. I see you are prospering, but I fearyou will have torment on an overwhelming Day. 85My people, in
fairness, give full measure and weight. Do not withhold from peoplethings that are rightly theirs, and do not spread corruption in theland. 86What lasts with God is best for you, if you are believers: I am
not your keeper.’ 87They said, ‘Shu ῾ayb, does your prayer tell you
that we should abandon what our forefathers worshipped and refrainfrom doing whatever we please with our own property? Indeed youare a tolerant and sensible man.’ 88He answered, ‘My people, can you
not see? What if I am acting on clear evidence from my Lord? He
Himself has given me good provision: I do not want to do what I amforbidding you to do, I only want to put things right as far as I can. Icannot succeed without God’s help: I trust in Him, and always turnto Him. 89My people, do not let your opposition to me bring upon
you a similar fate to the peoples of Noah or Hud or Salih; the peopleof Lot are not far away from you.
b90Ask forgiveness from your Lord,
and turn to Him in repentance: my Lord is merciful and mostloving.’
91They said, ‘Shu ῾ayb, we do not understand much of what you
say, and we ﬁnd you very weak in our midst. But for your family, we
would have stoned you, for you have no great status among us.’ 92He
said, ‘My people, is my family stronger in your estimation than God?
And have you put Him behind you? My Lord surrounds everythingyou do. 93My people, do whatever is within your power, and I will
do likewise. Soon you will know who will receive a disgraceful
punishment and who is a liar. Watch out, and so will I.’ 94When what
We had ordained came about, in Our mercy We saved Shu ῾ayb and
his fellow believers, but a mighty blast struck the wrongdoers. By
aThis town is not far from the evildoers of Mecca, within their trading range (see
37:137–8), nor is the punishment far from them.
bIn time or place. See 7:85;7:93.The Qur ᾿an 11:82 142morning they lay dead in their homes, 95as if they had never lived
andﬂourished there. Yes, away with the people of Midian, just like
the Thamud!
96We also sent Moses, with Our signs and clear authority, 97to
Pharaoh and his supporters, but they followed Pharaoh’s orders, andPharaoh’s orders were misguided. 98He will be at the forefront of his
people on the Day of Resurrection, leading them down towards the
Fire. What a foul drinking place to be led to! 99They were pursued
by God’s rejection in this life and will be on the Day of Resurrection,
too. What a foul gift to be given!
100We relate to you [Muhammad] such accounts of earlier towns:
some of them are still standing; some have been mown down; 101We
did not wrong them; they wronged themselves. Their gods, which
they called on beside God, were no use to them when what yourLord had ordained came about; they only increased their ruin.102Such is the punishment of your Lord for towns in the midst of
their sins: His punishment is terrible and severe. 103There truly is a
sign in this for anyone who fears the punishment of the Hereafter.That is a Day in which all people will be gathered together, a Day forall to see. 104We are delaying it only for a speci ﬁed period, 105and
when that Day comes, no soul will speak except by His permission,
and some of them will be wretched and some happy. 106The
wretched ones will be in the Fire, sighing and groaning, 107there to
remain for as long as the heavens and earth endure, unless your Lordwills otherwise: your Lord carries out whatever He wills. 108As for
those who have been blessed, they will be in Paradise, there toremain as long as the heavens and earth endure, unless your Lordwills otherwise– – an unceasing gift.
a
109[Prophet], have no doubt about what these people worship: it is
merely what their fathers worshipped before them, and We shallcertainly give them their share in full, without any reduction. 110We
gave Moses the Scripture before you, but di ﬀerences arose about it
and if it had not been for a prior word from your Lord, a decision
would already have been made between them, though they are ingrave doubt about it. 111Your Lord will give everyone full due for
whatever they have done: He is aware of everything they do. 112So
keep to the right course as you have been commanded, together with
aLiterally ‘uninterrupted giving’.Hud 143 11:112those who have turned to God with you. Do not overstep the limits,
for He sees everything you do. 113Do not rely on those who do evil, or
the Fire may touch you, and then you will have no one to protect youfrom God, nor will you be helped.
114[Prophet], keep up the prayer at both ends of the day, and
during parts of the night, for good things drive bad away– – this is a
reminder for those who are aware. 115Be steadfast: God does not let
the rewards of those who do good go to waste. 116If only there had
been, among the generations before your time, people with a rem-
nant of good sense, to forbid corruption on the earth! We saved only
a few of them, while the unjust pursued the enjoyment of plenty, andpersisted in sin. 117Your Lord would not destroy any town without
cause if its people were acting righteously. 118If your Lord had
pleased, He would have made all people a single community, but theycontinue to have their di ﬀerences– –119except those on whom your
Lord has mercy– – for He created them to be this way, and the word
of your Lord is ﬁnal: ‘I shall de ﬁnitely ﬁll Hell with both jinn and
men.’
120So [Muhammad], We have told you the stories of the prophets
to make your heart ﬁrm and in these accounts truth has come to you,
as well as lessons and reminders for the believers. 121Say to those who
do not believe, ‘Do whatever you can: we too are doing what we can,’
122and ‘Wait: we too are waiting.’ 123All that is hidden in the heavens
and earth belongs to God, and all authority
a goes back to Him. So
[Prophet], worship Him, and put your trust in Him: your Lord isnever unaware of what you [people] are doing.
aOr ‘all things’.The Qur ᾿an 11:113 14412. JOSEPH
A Meccan sura dealing primarily with the story of Joseph, but framed
by a three-verse introduction about the Qur ᾿an and a ten-verse epilogue
about the Meccans’ response, the punishment met by earlier disbelievers, andencouragement for the Prophet.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Alif Lam Ra
These are the verses of the Scripture that makes things clear– – 2We
have sent it down as an Arabic Qur ᾿an so that you [people] may
understand.
3We tell you [Prophet] the best of stories in revealing this Qur ᾿an
to you.a Before thisb you were one of those who knew nothing about
them. 4Joseph said to his father, ‘Father, I dreamed of eleven stars
and the sun and the moon: I saw them all bow down before me,’ 5and
he replied, ‘My son, tell your brothers nothing of this dream, or theymay plot to harm you– –Satan is man’s sworn enemy. 6This is about
how your Lord will choose you, teach you to interpret dreams, andperfect His blessing on you and the House of Jacob, just as Heperfected it earlier on your forefathers Abraham and Isaac: yourLord is all knowing and wise.’
7There are lessons in the story of Joseph and his brothers for all
who seek them. 8The brothers said [to each other], ‘Although we are
many, Joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are– –our father is clearly in the wrong.’ 9[One of them said], ‘Kill Joseph
or banish him to another land, and your father’s attention will be free
to turn to you. After that you can be righteous.’ 10[Another of them]
said, ‘Do not kill Joseph, but, if you must, throw him into the hiddendepths of a well where some caravan may pick him up.’
11They said to their father, ‘Why do you not trust us with Joseph?
We wish him well. 12Send him with us tomorrow and he will enjoy
aMany translators add ‘though’ (‘. . . to you, though before this . . .’), thinking that
in is conditional, when in fact it is for emphasis here, as con ﬁrmed by the emphatic lam
following it.
bCf. 11:49 and 42:52.himself and play– – we will take good care of him.’ 13He replied, ‘The
thought of you taking him away with you worries me: I am afraid awolf may eat him when you are not paying attention.’ 14They said,
‘If a wolf were to eat him when there are so many of us, we wouldtruly be losers!’
15Then they took him away with them, resolved upon throwing
him into the hidden depths of a well– – We inspired him, saying, ‘You
will tell them of all this [at a time] when they do not realize [who youare]!’– –16and at nightfall they returned to their father weeping.
17They said, ‘We went o ﬀ racing one another, leaving Joseph behind
with our things, and a wolf ate him. You will not believe us, thoughwe are telling the truth!’ 18and they showed him his shirt, decep-
tively stained with blood. He cried, ‘No! Your souls have prompted
you to do wrong! But it is best to be patient: from God alone I seekhelp to bear what you are saying.’
19Some travellers came by. They sent someone to draw water and
he let down his bucket. ‘Good news!’ he exclaimed. ‘Here is a boy!’They hid him like a piece of merchandise– – God was well aware of
what they did– –20and then sold him for a small price, for a few pieces
of silver: so little did they value him.
21The Egyptian who bought him said to his wife, ‘Look after him
well! He may be useful to us, or we may adopt him as a son.’ In this
way We settled Joseph in that land and later taught him how tointerpret dreams: God always prevails in His purpose, though mostpeople do not realize it.
22When he reached maturity, We gave him judgement and know-
ledge: this is how We reward those who do good. 23The woman in
whose house he was living tried to seduce him: she bolted the doorsand said, ‘Come to me,’ and he replied, ‘God forbid! My master hasbeen good to me; wrongdoers never prosper.’ 24She made for him,
and he would have succumbed to her if he had not seen evidence ofhis Lord– – We did this in order to keep evil and indecency away from
him, for he was truly one of Our chosen servants. 25They raced for
the door– – she tore his shirt from behind– – and at the door they met
her husband. She said, ‘What, other than prison or painful punish-
ment, should be the reward of someone who tried to dishonour yourwife?’ 26but he said, ‘She tried to seduce me.’ A member of her
household suggested, ‘If his shirt is torn at the front, then it is shewho is telling the truth and he who is lying, 27but if it is torn at theThe Qur ᾿an 12:13 146back, then she is lying and he is telling the truth.’ 28When the hus-
band saw that the shirt was torn at the back, he said, ‘This is anotherinstance of women’s treachery: your treachery is truly great.29Joseph, overlook this; but you [wife], ask forgiveness for your sin– –
you have done wrong.’
30Some women of the city said, ‘The governor’s wife is trying to
seduce her slave! Love for him consumes her heart! It is clear to us
that she has gone astray.’ 31When she heard their malicious talk, she
prepared a banquet and sent for them, giving each of them a knife.
She said to Joseph, ‘Come out and show yourself to them!’ and when
the women saw him, they were stunned by his beauty, and cut theirhands, exclaiming, ‘Great God! He cannot be mortal! He must be a
precious angel!’ 32She said, ‘This is the one you blamed me for. I
tried to seduce him and he wanted to remain chaste, but if he doesnot do what I command now, he will be put in prison and degraded.’33Joseph said, ‘My Lord! I would prefer prison to what these women
are calling me to do. If You do not protect me from their treachery,I shall yield to them and do wrong,’ 34and his Lord answered
his prayer and protected him from their treachery– – He is the All
Hearing, the All Knowing.
35In the end they
a thought it best, after seeing all the signs of
his innocence, that they should imprison him for a while. 36Two
young men went into prison alongside him. One of them said, ‘Idreamed that I was pressing grapes’; the other said, ‘I dreamed that
I was carrying bread on my head and that the birds were eating it.’
[They said], ‘Tell us what this means– – we can see that you are a
knowledgeable
b man.’
37He said, ‘I can tell you what this means before any meal arrives:
this is part of what my Lord has taught me. I reject the faith of thosewho disbelieve in God and deny the life to come, 38and I follow the
faith of my forefathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Because of God’sgrace to us and to all mankind, we would never worship anythingbeside God, but most people are ungrateful. 39Fellow prisoners,
would many diverse gods be better than God the One, the AllPowerful? [No indeed!] 40All those you worship instead of Him
are mere names you and your forefathers have invented, names for
aThe governor and his household.
bRazi gives this interpretation of muhsinin .Joseph 147 12:40which God has sent down no sanction. Authority belongs to God
alone, and He orders you to worship none but Him: this is the truefaith, though most people do not realize it. 41Fellow prisoners, one of
you will serve his master with wine; the other will be cruci ﬁed and the
birds will peck at his head. That is the end of the matter on whichyou asked my opinion.’ 42Joseph said to the one he knew would be
saved, ‘Mention me to your master,’ but Satan made him forget to do
this, and so Joseph remained in prison for a number of years.
43The king said, ‘I dreamed about seven fat cows being eaten by
seven lean ones; seven green ears of corn and [seven] others
withered. Counsellors, if you can interpret dreams, tell me the mean-ing of my dream.’ 44They said, ‘These are confusing dreams and we
are not skilled at dream-interpretation,’ 45but the prisoner who had
been freed at last remembered [Joseph] and said, ‘I shall tell youwhat this means. Give me leave to go.’
46‘Truthful Joseph! Tell us the meaning of seven fat cows being
eaten by seven lean ones, seven green ears of corn and [seven] otherswithered, 47then I can return to the people to inform them.’ Joseph
said, ‘You will sow for seven consecutive years as usual. Store all thatyou reap, left in the ear, apart from the little you eat. 48After that will
come seven years of hardship which will consume all but a little of
what you stored up for them; 49after that will come a year when the
people will have abundant rain and will press grapes.’
50The king said, ‘Bring him to me,’ but when the messenger came
to fetch Joseph, he said, ‘Go back to your master and ask him aboutwhat happened to those women who cut their hands– – my Lord
knows all about their treachery.’ 51The king asked the women, ‘What
happened when you tried to seduce Joseph?’ They said, ‘God forbid!We know nothing bad of him!’ and the governor’s wife said, ‘Nowthe truth is out: it was I who tried to seduce him– – he is an honest
man.’ 52[Joseph said, ‘This was] for my master to know that I did not
betray him behind his back: God does not guide the mischief of thetreacherous. 53I do not pretend to be blameless, for man’s very soul
incites him to evil unless my Lord shows mercy: He is most forgiv-
ing, most merciful.’
54The king said, ‘Bring him to me: I will have him serve me
personally,’ and then, once he had spoken with him, ‘From now onyou will have our trust and favour.’ 55Joseph said, ‘Put me in charge
of the nation’s storehouses: I shall manage them prudently and care-The Qur ᾿an 12:41 148fully.’ 56In this way We settled Joseph in that land to live wherever he
wished: We grant Our mercy to whoever We will and do not fail toreward those who do good. 57The reward of the Hereafter is best for
those who believe and are mindful of God.
58Joseph’s brothers came and presented themselves before him.
He recognized them– – though they did not recognize him– –59and
once he had given them their provisions, he said, ‘Bring me the
brother [you left with] your father!
a Have you not seen me giving
generous measure and being the best of hosts? 60You will have no
more corn from me if you do not bring him to me, and you will notbe permitted to approach me.’ 61They said, ‘We shall do all we can to
persuade his father to send him with us, indeed we shall.’ 62Joseph
said to his servants, ‘Put their [traded] goods back into their saddle-
bags, so that they may recognize them when they go back to their
family, and [be eager to] return.’
63When they returned to their father, they said, ‘Father, we have
been denied any more corn, but send our brother back with us andwe shall be given another measure. We shall guard him carefully.’64He said, ‘Am I to entrust him to you as I did his brother before?
God is the best guardian and the Most Merciful of the merciful.’65Then, when they opened their packs, they discovered that their
goods had been returned to them and they said, ‘Father! We need nomore [goods to barter]:
b look, our goods have been returned to us.
We shall get corn for our household; we shall keep our brother safe;we shall be entitled to another camel-load of grain– – an extra meas-
ure so easily achieved!’ 66He said, ‘I will never send him with you,
not unless you swear by God that you will bring him back to me ifthat is humanly possible.’
c Then, when they had given him their
pledge, he said, ‘Our words are entrusted to God.’ 67He said, ‘My
sons, do not enter all by one gate– – use di ﬀerent gates. But I cannot
help you against the will of God: all power is in God’s hands. I trust
in Him; let everyone put their trust in Him,’ 68and, when they
entered as their father had told them, it did not help them againstthe will of God, it merely satis ﬁed a wish of Jacob’s. He knew well
what We had taught him, though most people do not.
69Then, when they presented themselves before Joseph, he drew
aOr a paternal half-brother (Benjamin).
bThis understanding of the phrase ma nabghi  is supported by Razi.
cLiterally ‘unless you are totally surrounded’. Razi suggests by death or the enemy.Joseph 149 12:69his brother aparta and said, ‘I am your brother, so do not be saddened
by their past actions,’ 70and, once he had given them their provisions,
he placed the drinking-cup in his brother’s pack. A man called out,‘People of the caravan! You are thieves!’ 71and they turned and said,
‘What have you lost?’ 72They replied, ‘The king’s drinking-cup is
missing,’ and, ‘Whoever returns it will get a camel-load [of grain],’and, ‘I give you my word.’ 73They said, ‘By God! You must know
that we did not come to make mischief in your land: we are nothieves.’ 74They asked them, ‘And if we ﬁnd that you are lying, what
penalty shall we apply to you?’ 75and they answered, ‘The penalty
will be [the enslavement of] the person in whose bag the cup isfound: this is how we punish wrongdoers.’ 76[Joseph] began by
searching their bags, then his brother’s, and he pulled it out from his
brother’s bag.
In this way We devised a plan for Joseph– – if God had not willed it
so, he could not have detained his brother as a penalty under theking’s law– – We raise the rank of whoever We will. Above everyone
who has knowledge there is the One who is all knowing.
77[His brothers] said, ‘If he is a thief then his brother was a thief
before him,’ but Joseph kept his secrets and did not reveal anythingto them. He said, ‘You are in a far worse situation. God knows bestthe truth of what you claim.’ 78They said, ‘Mighty governor, he has
an elderly father. Take one of us in his place. We can see that you area very good man.’ 79He replied, ‘God forbid that we should take
anyone other than the person on whom we found our property: thatwould be unjust of us.’ 80When they lost hope of [persuading] him,
they withdrew to confer with each other: the eldest of them said, ‘Doyou not remember that your father took a solemn pledge from you inthe name of God and before that you failed in your duty with regardto Joseph? I will not leave this land until my father gives me leave orGod decides for me– – He is the best decider– –81so go back to your
father and say, “Your son stole. We can only tell you what we saw.How could we guard against the unforeseen? 82Ask in the town
where we have been; ask the people of the caravan we travelled with:
we are telling the truth.”’
aLiterally ‘accommodated him’ or ‘took him as a guest’. Some interpret this as
suggesting that the brothers were o ﬀered lodgings in pairs and Benjamin, as the odd one
out, was given lodging with Joseph; another suggestion is that the two full brothersdined together: either way the sense is that Joseph drew Benjamin apart from the others.The Qur ᾿an 12:70 15083Their father said, ‘No! Your souls have prompted you to do
wrong! But it is best to be patient: may God bring all of thema back
to me– – He alone is the All Knowing, the All Wise,’ 84and he turned
away from them, saying, ‘Alas for Joseph!’ His eyes went whitewith grief and he was ﬁlled with sorrow. 85They said, ‘By God! You
will ruin your health if you do not stop thinking of Joseph, or evendie.’ 86He said, ‘I plead my grief and sorrow before God. I have
knowledge from God that you do not have. 87My sons, go and seek
news of Joseph and his brother and do not despair of God’s mercy– –
only disbelievers despair of God’s mercy.’
88Then, when they presented themselves before Joseph, they said,
‘Mighty governor, misfortune has a ﬄicted us and our family. We
have brought only a little merchandise, but give us full measure. Becharitable to us: God rewards the charitable.’ 89He said, ‘Do you now
realize what you did to Joseph and his brother when you were ignor-ant?’ 90and they cried, ‘Could it be that you are Joseph?’ He said, ‘I
am Joseph. This is my brother. God has been gracious to us: Goddoes not deny anyone who is mindful of God and steadfast in adver-sity the rewards of those who do good.’ 91They said, ‘By God! God
really did favour you over all of us and we were in the wrong!’ 92but
he said, ‘You will hear no reproaches today. May God forgive you:He is the Most Merciful of the merciful. 93Take my shirt and lay it
over my father’s face: he will recover his sight. Then bring yourwhole family back to me.’
94Later, when the caravan departed, their father said, ‘You may
think I am senile but I can smell Joseph,’ 95but [people] said, ‘By
God! You are still lost in that old illusion of yours!’ 96Then, when the
bearer of good news came and placed the shirt on to Jacob’s face, hiseyesight returned and he said, ‘Did I not tell you that I have know-ledge from God that you do not have?’ 97The [brothers] said,
‘Father, ask God to forgive our sins– – we were truly in the wrong.’
98He replied, ‘I shall ask my Lord to forgive you: He is the Most
Forgiving, the Most Merciful.’
99Later, when they presented themselves before Joseph, he drew
his parents to him– – he said, ‘Welcome to Egypt: you will all be safe
here, God willing’– –100and took them up to [his] throne. They all
bowed down before him and he said, ‘Father, this is the ful ﬁlment of
aRazi suggests Joseph, Benjamin, and the eldest son who remained in Egypt.Joseph 151 12:100that dream I had long ago. My Lord has made it come true and has
been gracious to me– – He released me from prison and He brought
you here from the desert– – after Satan sowed discord between me
and my brothers. My Lord is most subtle in achieving what He will;He is the All Knowing, the Truly Wise. 101My Lord! You have given
me authority; You have taught me something about the interpret-ation of dreams; Creator of the heavens and the earth, You are myprotector in this world and in the Hereafter. Let me die in truedevotion to You. Join me with the righteous.’
102This account is part of what was beyond your knowledge
[Muhammad]. We revealed it to you: you were not present withJoseph’s brothers when they made their treacherous plans. 103How-
ever eagerly you may want them to, most men will not believe. 104You
ask no reward from them for this: it is a reminder for all people105and there are many signs in the heavens and the earth that they
pass by and give no heed to– –106most of them will only believe in
God while also joining others with Him. 107Are they so sure that an
overwhelming punishment from God will not fall on them, or thatthe Last Hour will not come upon them suddenly when they leastexpect it? 108Say, ‘This is my way: based on clear evidence, I, and all
who follow me, call [people] to God– – glory be to God!– – I do not
join others with Him.’
109All the messengers We sent before you [Muhammad] were men
to whom We made revelations, men chosen from the people of theirtowns. Have the [disbelievers] not travelled through the land andseen the end of those who went before them? For those who aremindful of God, the Home in the Hereafter is better. Do you[people] not use your reason? 110When the messengers lost all hope
and realized that they had been dismissed as liars, Our help came tothem: We saved whoever We pleased, but Our punishment will notbe turned away from guilty people. 111There is a lesson in the stories
of such people for those who understand. This revelation is no fabri-cation: it is a con ﬁrmation of the truth of what was sent before it; an
explanation of everything;
a a guide and a blessing for those who
believe.
aThere are two interpretations of this phrase: (i) ‘everything to do with the story of
Joseph’; and (ii) ‘everything to do with religion’.The Qur ᾿an 12:101 15213. THUNDER
A Medinan sura that takes its title from the thunder that praises God in verse
13. The sura is distinguished by its moving description of God’s power and
knowledge. Muhammad’s place in a long tradition of prophets, none of whomcould produce miracles on request, is stressed, and his role emphasized: it is onlyto deliver the message. God is the One who will call people to account for theirdeeds, and He is the witness for the truth of the message.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Alif Lam Mim Ra
These are the signs of the Scripture. What your Lord has sent down
to you [Prophet] is the truth, yet most people do not believe. 2It is
God who raised up the heavens with no visible supports and thenestablished Himself on the throne; He has subjected the sun and themoon each to pursue its course for an appointed time; He regulatesall things, and makes the revelations clear so that you may be certainof meeting your Lord; 3it is He who spread out the earth, placed
ﬁrm mountains and rivers on it, and made two of every kind of fruit;
He draws the veil of night over the day. There truly are signs in thisfor people who re ﬂect. 4There are, in the land, neighbouring plots,
gardens of vineyards, corn ﬁelds, palm trees in clusters or otherwise,
all watered with the same water, yet We make some of them tastebetter than others: there truly are signs in this for people who reason.
5If anything can amaze you [Prophet], then you should surely be
amazed at their asking, ‘What? When we become dust, shall we becreated anew?’ These are the ones who deny their Lord, who willwear iron collars around their necks and be the inhabitants of theFire, there to remain. 6They ask you to bring on the punishment
rather than any promised rewards, though there have been manyexamples before them– –your Lord is full of forgiveness for people,despite their wrongdoing, but He is truly severe in punishment.7The disbelievers say, ‘Why has no miracle been sent down to him
from his Lord?’ But you are only there to give warning: [earlier]
communities each had their guide.8God knows what every female bears and how much their wombs
shrink or swell– – everything has its measure with Him; 9He knows
what is not seen as well as what is seen; He is the Great, the MostHigh. 10It makes no di ﬀerence whether any of you speak secretly or
aloud, whether you are hiding under cover of night or walking aboutin the day: 11each person has guardian angels before him and behind,
watching over him by God’s command. God does not change the
condition of a people [for the worse]
a unless they change what is in
themselves, but if He wills harm on a people, no one can ward it o ﬀ––
apart from Him, they have no protector.
12It is He who shows you the lightning, inspiring fear and
hope; He builds up the clouds heavy with rain; 13the thunder
sounds His praises, as do the angels in awe of Him; He sends
thunderbolts to strike whoever He will. Yet still they dispute about
God– – He has mighty plans. 14The only true prayer is to Him:
those they pray to besides Him give them no answer any more thanwater reaches the mouth of someone who simply stretches out hishands for it– – it cannot do so: the prayers of the disbelievers are all
in vain. 15All that are in heaven and earth submit
b to God alone,
willingly or unwillingly, as do their shadows in the mornings and inthe evenings.
16Say [Prophet], ‘Who is Lord of the heavens and the earth?’ Say,
‘God.’ Say, ‘Why do you take protectors other than Him, who canneither bene ﬁt nor harm even themselves?’ Say, ‘Are the blind equal
to those who can see? And are the depths of darkness equal to thelight?’ Have the partners they assign to God created anything likeHis creation so that their creation is indistinguishable from His? Say,‘God is the Creator of all things: He is the One, the All Compelling.’17He sends water from the sky that ﬁlls riverbeds to over ﬂowing,
each according to its measure. The stream carries on its surface agrowing layer of froth, like the froth that appears when people meltmetals in the ﬁre to make ornaments and tools: in this way God
illustrates truth and falsehood– – the froth disappears, but what is of
beneﬁt to man stays behind– – this is how God makes illustrations.
18There will be the best of rewards for those who respond to their
Lord; those who do not respond would willingly give away the
aCf. 8:53;16:112.
bOr ‘prostrate’: shadows submit to God’s laws in nature and also stretch out on the
ground as if prostrating. Sajada  has both meanings.The Qur ᾿an 13:8 154earth’s contents twice over, if they had it, in order to ransom them-
selves, so terrible will be their reckoning. Hell will be their home,and their bed wretched.
19Can someone who knows that the revelation from your Lord is
the Truth be equal to someone who is blind? Only those with under-standing will take it to heart; 20those who ful ﬁl the agreements they
make in God’s name and do not break their pledges; 21who join
together what God commands to be joined; who are in awe of theirLord and fear the harshness of the Reckoning; 22who remain stead-
fast through their desire for the face of their Lord; who keep up the
prayer; who give secretly and openly from what We have provided forthem; who repel evil with good. These will have the reward of the
[true] home: 23they will enter perpetual Gardens, along with their
righteous ancestors, spouses, and descendants; the angels will go into them from every gate, 24‘Peace be with you, because you have
remained steadfast. What an excellent reward is this home of yours!’25But there will be rejection for those who break their con ﬁrmed
agreements made in God’s name, who break apart what God hascommanded to be joined and who spread corruption on earth: theirsis the dreadful home– –26God gives abundantly to whoever He will,
and sparingly to whoever He will– – and though they may revel in the
life of this world, it is but a ﬂeeting comfort compared with the Life
to come.
27The disbelievers say, ‘Why has no miracle been sent down to
him from his Lord?’ [Prophet], say, ‘God leaves whoever He will tostray, and guides to Himself those who turn towards Him, 28those
who have faith and whose hearts ﬁnd peace in the remembrance
of God– – truly it is in the remembrance of God that hearts ﬁnd
peace– –29those who believe and do righteous deeds: joy awaits these,
and their ﬁnal homecoming will be excellent.’ 30So We have sent you
[Prophet] to a community– – other communities passed away long
before them– – to recite to them what We reveal to you. Yet they
disbelieve in the Lord of Mercy. Say, ‘He is my Lord: there is no godbut Him. I put my trust in Him and to Him is my return.’ 31If there
were ever to be a Qur ᾿an with which mountains could be moved, the
earth shattered, or the dead made to speak [it would have been thisone],
a but everything is truly in God’s hands. Do the believers not
aOr ‘[they still would not believe]’.Thunder 155 13:31realize that if God had so willed, He could have guided all mankind?
As for the disbelievers, because of their misdeeds, disaster will notcease to a ﬄict them or fall close to their homes until God’s promise
is ful ﬁlled: God never fails to keep His promise.
32Many messengers before you [Muhammad] were mocked, but I
granted respite to the disbelievers: in the end, I took them to task– –
how terrible My punishment was! 33Is He who stands over every soul
marking its action [in need of any partner]? Yet they ascribe partnersto God. Say, ‘Name them,’ or, ‘Can you tell Him about something
on the earth He does not know to exist, or is this just a display of
words?’ But the things they devise are made alluring to the dis-believers and they are barred from the [right] path: no one can guide
those God leaves to stray. 34There is a punishment for them in this
world, but the punishment of the Hereafter will be harder– – no one
will defend them against God.
35Here is a picture of the Garden that those mindful of God have
been promised: ﬂowing streams and perpetual food and shade. This
is the reward that awaits those who are mindful of God; the dis-believers’ reward is the Fire. 36Those to whom We sent the Scripture
rejoice in what has been revealed to you [Prophet]; some factionsdeny parts of it. Say, ‘I am commanded to worship God, and not joinanything with Him in worship: to Him I call [others] and to Him Ishall return.’ 37So We have sent down the Qur ᾿an to give judgement
in the Arabic language. If you were to follow their desires, after theknowledge that has come to you, you would have no one to guard youor protect you from God. 38We sent messengers before you and gave
them wives and o ﬀspring; no messenger was given the power to
produce a miracle except with God’s permission. There was a Scrip-ture for every age:
a39God erases or con ﬁrms whatever He will, and
the source of Scripture is with Him. 40Whether We let you [Prophet]
see part of what We threaten them with, or cause you to die [beforethat], your duty is only to deliver the message: the Reckoning is
Ours. 41Do they not see how We come to [their] land and shrink its
borders? God decides– – no one can reverse His decision– – and He is
swift in reckoning. 42Those before them also schemed, but the over-
all scheme belongs to God: He knows what each soul does. In the
end, the disbelievers will ﬁnd out who will have the excellent home.
aAnother interpretation is ‘there is a time decreed for everything’.The Qur ᾿an 13:32 15643They say, ‘You have not been sent.’ Say, ‘God is su ﬃcient witness
between me and you: all knowledge of the Scripture comes fromHim.’
a
aAlternatively, ‘God– – and those who have [true] knowledge of the Scripture– – are
suﬃcient witness between us.’Thunder 157 13:4314. ABRAHAM
A Meccan sura named after Abraham (verses 35–41), who prays to God that
Mecca may be made prosperous so that its people may be thankful and continueto worship God. The ungrateful are condemned, and the grateful commended,throughout the sura. Abraham also asks that he and his descendants may beprotected from idol-worship. This serves to remind the Meccans that theyshould shun the worship of idols.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Alif Lam Ra
This is a Scripture which We have sent down to you [Prophet] so
that, with their Lord’s permission, you may bring people from thedepths of darkness into light, to the path of the Almighty, the
Praiseworthy One, 2God, to whom everything in the heavens and
earth belongs. How terrible will be the torment of those who ignore
[Him], 3those who prefer the life of this world over the life to come,
who turn others from God’s way, trying to make it crooked: suchpeople have gone far astray. 4We have never sent a messenger who
did not use his own people’s language to make things clear for them.But still God leaves whoever He will to stray, and guides whoever Hewill: He is the Almighty, the All Wise.
5We sent Moses with Our signs: ‘Bring out your people from the
depths of darkness into light. Remind them of the Days of God:
a
there truly are signs in this for every steadfast, thankful person.’6And so Moses said to his people, ‘Remember God’s blessing on you
when He saved you from Pharaoh’s people, who were in ﬂicting
terrible su ﬀering on you, slaughtering your sons and sparing only
your women– –that was a severe test from your Lord! 7Remember
that He promised, “If you are thankful, I will give you more, butif you are thankless, My punishment is terrible indeed.” ’ 8And
Moses said, ‘Even if you, together with everybody else on earth, are
thankless, God is self-su ﬃcient, worthy of all praise.’
aThe times when God singled them out for special favour or tribulation (cf.
2:30–61).9Have you not heard about those who went before you, the people
of Noah, ῾Ad, Thamud, and those who lived after them, known only
to God? Their messengers came to them with clear proof, but theytried to silence them,
a saying, ‘We do not believe the message with
which you were sent. We have disturbing doubts about what you areasking us to do.’ 10Their messengers answered, ‘Can there be any
doubt about God, the Creator of the heavens and earth? He calls youto Him in order to forgive you your sins and let you enjoy your lifeuntil the appointed hour.’ But they said, ‘You are only men like us.You want to turn us away from what our forefathers used to worship.Bring us clear proof then, [if you can].’ 11Their messengers
answered, ‘True, we are only men like you, but God favours which-ever of His servants He chooses. We cannot bring you any proofunless God permits it, so let the believers put all their trust in Him– –
12why should we not put our trust in God when it is He who has
guided us to this way we follow? We shall certainly bear steadfastlywhatever harm you do to us. Let anyone who trusts, trust in God.’
13The disbelievers said to their messengers, ‘We shall expel you
from our land unless you return to our religion.’ But their Lordinspired the messengers: ‘We shall destroy the evildoers, 14and leave
you to dwell in the land after them. This reward is for those who arein awe of meeting Me, and of My warnings.’ 15They asked God to
decide, and every obstinate tyrant failed– –16Hell awaits each one; he
will be given foul water to drink, 17which he will try to gulp but
scarcely be able to swallow; death will encroach on him from everyside, but he will not die; more intense su ﬀering will lie ahead of him.
18The deeds of those who reject their Lord are like ashes that the
wind blows furiously on a stormy day: they have no power overanything they have gained. This is to stray far, far away.
19[Prophet], do you not see that God created the heavens and the
earth for a purpose? He could remove all of you and replace you witha new creation if He wished to: 20that is not di ﬃcult for God.
21When they all appear before Him, the weak will say to the power-
seekers, ‘We were your followers. Can you protect us from any ofGod’s punishment?’ They will reply, ‘If God had guided us, wewould have guided you. It makes no di ﬀerence now whether we rage
or endure with patience: there is no escape.’ 22When everything has
aLiterally ‘they pushed their hands into the prophets’ mouths’.Abraham 159 14:22been decided, Satan will say, ‘God gave you a true promise. I too
made promises but they were false ones: I had no power over youexcept to call you, and you responded to my call, so do not blameme; blame yourselves. I cannot help you, nor can you help me. Ireject the way you associated me with God before.’ A bitter tormentawaits such wrongdoers, 23but those who believed and did good
deeds will be brought into Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams,
there to remain with their Lord’s permission: their greeting there is‘Peace’.
24[Prophet], do you not see how God makes comparisons? A good
word is like a good tree whose root is ﬁrm and whose branches are
high in the sky, 25yielding constant fruit by its Lord’s leave– – God
makes such comparisons for people so that they may re ﬂect––26but
an evil word is like a rotten tree, uprooted from the surface of theearth, with no power to endure. 27God will give ﬁrmness to those
who believe in the ﬁrmly rooted word,
a both in this world and the
Hereafter, but the evildoers He leaves to stray: God does whateverHe will.
28[Prophet], do you not see those who, in exchange for God’s
favour, o ﬀer only ingratitude and make their people end up in the
home of ruin, Hell, 29where they burn? What an evil place to stay!
30They set up [false deities] as God’s equals to lead people astray
from His path. Say, ‘Take your pleasure now, for your destination isthe Fire.’ 31Tell My servants who have believed to keep up the
prayer and give, secretly and in public, out of what We have providedthem, before a Day comes when there will be no trading orfriendship.
32It is God who created the heavens and earth, who has sent down
water from the sky and with it brought forth produce to nourish you;He has made ships useful to you, sailing the sea by His command,
and the rivers too; 33He has made the sun and the moon useful to
you, steady on their paths; He has made the night and day useful to
you 34and given you some of everything you asked Him for. If you
tried to count God’s favours you could never calculate them: man istruly unjust and ungrateful.
35Remember when Abraham said, ‘Lord, make this town safe!
Preserve me and my o ﬀspring from idolatry, 36Lord, the [idols] have
aPossibly the Scripture, ﬁrmly rooted in knowledge from God.The Qur ᾿an 14:23 160led many people astray! Anyone who follows me is with me, but as
for anyone who disobeys me– – You are surely forgiving and merciful.
37Our Lord, I have established some of my o ﬀspring in an
uncultivated valley, close to Your Sacred House, Lord, so that theymay keep up the prayer. Make people’s hearts turn to them, andprovide them with produce, so that they may be thankful. 38Our
Lord, You know well what we conceal and what we reveal: nothing at
all is hidden from God, on earth or in heaven. 39Praise be to God,
who has granted me Ishmael and Isaac in my old age: my Lord hears
all requests! 40Lord, grant that I and my o ﬀspring may keep up the
prayer. Our Lord, accept my request. 41Our Lord, forgive me, my
parents, and the believers on the Day of Reckoning.’
42Do not think [Prophet] that God is unaware of what the dis-
believers
a do: He only gives them respite until a Day when their eyes
will stare in terror. 43They will rush forward, craning their necks,
unable to divert their eyes, a gaping void in their hearts. 44So warn
people of the Day when punishment will come to them, and whenthe disbelievers will say, ‘Our Lord, give us a little more time: weshall answer Your call and follow the messengers.’ Did you [dis-believers] not swear in the past that your power would have no end?45You lived in the same places as others who wronged themselves
before, and you were clearly shown how We dealt with them– –W e
gave you many examples. 46They made their plots, but, even if their
plots had been able to move mountains, God had the answer.
47So do not think [Prophet] that God will break His promise to
His messengers: He is mighty, and capable of retribution. 48One
Day– – when the earth is turned into another earth, the heavens into
another heaven, and people all appear before God, the One, theOverpowering– –49you [Prophet] will see the guilty on that Day,
bound together in fetters, 50in garments of pitch, faces covered in
ﬁre. 51[All will be judged] so that God may reward each soul as it
deserves: God is swift in His reckoning.
52This is a message to all people, so that they may be warned by it,
and know that He is the only God, and so that those who have mindsmay take heed.
aThis is an instance where dhalimun  means ‘disbelievers’, see verse 44 and 31:11,13.Abraham 161 14:5215. AL-HIJR
A Meccan sura which takes its title from the reference to the people of al-Hijr
(verses 80–4). These are an example of the many who disbelieved and
rejected their prophets. Each has its own time for punishment so the Prophetshould bear patiently, not grieve over what the disbelievers say, and continuewith his worship. The sura uses the example of nature and Iblis’s insistenceon corrupting people to show, in turn, God’s grace and the danger Satanpersoni ﬁes.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Alif Lam Ra
These are the verses of the Scripture, a Qur ᾿an that makes things
clear. 2The disbelievers may well come to wish they had submitted
to God, 3so [Prophet] leave them to eat and enjoy themselves. Let
[false] hopes distract them: they will come to know. 4Never have We
destroyed a community that did not have a set time; 5no community
can bring its time forward, nor delay it. 6They say, ‘Receiver of this
Qur ᾿an! You are de ﬁnitely mad. 7Why do you not bring us the
angels, if you are telling the truth?’ 8But We send down the angels
only to bring justice and then these people will not be reprieved. 9We
have sent down the Qur ᾿an Ourself, and We Ourself will guard it.
Even before you [Prophet], 10We sent messengers among the various
communities of old, 11but they mocked every single messenger that
came to them: 12in this way We make the message slip through the
hearts of evildoers. 13They will not believe in it. That was what
happened with the peoples of long ago, 14and even if We opened a
gateway into Heaven for them and they rose through it, higher andhigher, 15they would still say, ‘Our eyes are hallucinating. We are
bewitched.’
16We have set constellations up in the sky and made it beautiful for
all to see, 17and guarded it from every stoned satan:
a18any eaves-
dropper will be pursued by a clearly visible ﬂame. 19As for the earth,
We have spread it out, set ﬁrm mountains on it, and made everything
aSee72:8–9.grow there in due balance. 20We have provided sustenance in it for
you and for all those creatures for whom you do not provide. 21There
is not a thing whose storehouses are not with Us. We send it downonly according to a well-de ﬁned measure: 22We send the winds to
fertilize, and We bring down water from the sky for you to drink– –
you do not control its sources. 23It is We who give life and death; it is
We who inherit [everything]. 24We know exactly those of you who
come ﬁrst and those who come later. 25[Prophet], it is your Lord who
will gather them all together: He is all wise, all knowing.
26We created man out of dried clay formed from dark mud– –27the
jinn We created before, from the ﬁre of scorching wind. 28Your Lord
said to the angels, ‘I will create a mortal out of dried clay, formed
from dark mud. 29When I have fashioned him and breathed My
spirit into him, bow down before him,’ 30and the angels all did so.
31But not Iblis: he refused to bow down like the others. 32God said,
‘Iblis, why did you not bow down like the others?’ 33and he
answered, ‘I will not bow to a mortal You created from dried clay,formed from dark mud.’ 34‘Get out of here!’ said God. ‘You are an
outcast, 35rejected until the Day of Judgement.’ 36Iblis said, ‘My
Lord, give me respite until the Day when they are raised from thedead.’ 37‘You have respite,’ said God, 38‘until the Day of the
Appointed Time.’ 39Iblis then said to God, ‘Because You have put
me in the wrong, I will lure mankind on earth and put them in thewrong, 40all except Your devoted servants.’ 41God said, ‘[Devotion]
is a straight path to Me: 42you will have no power over My servants,
only over the ones who go astray and follow you. 43Hell is the
promised place for all these, 44with seven gates, each gate having its
allotted share of them. 45But the righteous will be in Gardens with
springs– –46“Enter them in peace and safety!”– – 47and We shall
remove any bitterness from their hearts: [they will be like] brothers,sitting on couches, face to face. 48No weariness will ever touch them
there, nor will they ever be expelled.’ 49[Prophet], tell My servants
that I am the Forgiving, the Merciful, 50but My torment is the truly
painful one.
51Tell them too about Abraham’s guests: 52
when they came to him
and said, ‘Peace,’ he said, ‘We are afraid of you.’ 53‘Do not be afraid,’
they said, ‘We bring you good news of a son who will have greatknowledge.’ 54He said, ‘How can you give me such news when old
age has come to me? What sort of news is this?’ 55They said, ‘WeAl-Hijr
163 15:55have told you the truth, so do not despair.’ 56He said, ‘Who but the
misguided despair of the mercy of their Lord?’ 57and then asked,
‘Messengers, what is your errand?’ 58They replied, ‘We have been
sent to a people who are guilty.’ 59But We shall save the household of
Lot, 60all except his wife: We have decreed that she will be one of
those who stay behind.
61When the messengers came to the household of Lot, 62he said,
‘You are strangers.’ 63They said, ‘We have brought you what they
said would never happen: 64we have brought you the Truth. We
speak truly, 65so leave in the dead of the night with your household,
and walk behind them. Let none of you look back. Go where you arecommanded.’ 66We made this decree known to him: the last remnants
of those people would be wiped out in the morning. 67The people of
the town came along, revelling, 68and he told them, ‘These are my
guests, do not disgrace me. 69Fear God, and do not shame me.’
70They answered, ‘Have we not told you not to interfere [between us
and] anyone else?’ 71He said, ‘My daughters are here, if you must.’
72By your life [Prophet], they wandered on in their wild intoxication
73and the blast overtook them at sunrise: 74We turned their city
upside down and rained on them a shower of clay stones. 75There
truly is a sign in this for those who can learn– –76it is still there on the
highway– –77there truly is a sign in this for those who believe.
78The forest-dwellers,
a too, were wrongdoers 79and We took retri-
bution on them; both are still there on the highway, plain for all tosee. 80The people of al-Hijr
b also rejected Our messengers: 81We
gave them Our signs, but they turned their backs. 82They carved out
dwellings in the mountains, and lived in security– –83the blast over-
whelmed them early in the morning. 84What they had gained was of
no use to them.
85We did not create the heavens and the earth and everything
between them without a true purpose: the Hour will certainly come,so [Prophet] bear with them graciously. 86Your Lord is the All
Knowing Creator. 87We have given you the seven oft-recited verses
c
and the whole glorious Qur ᾿an. 88Do not look longingly at the
good things We have given some to enjoy. Do not grieve over the
aCf. 26:176–191;38:13;50:14.
bThe tribe of Thamud who lived north of Medina. Al-Hijr  means ‘stone city’, like
Petra in Jordan.
cAccording to most interpreters this refers to al-Fatiha ‘The Opening’ (Sura 1).The Qur ᾿an 15:56 164[disbelievers], but lower your wings over the believers 89and say, ‘I
am here to give plain warning,’ 90like the [warning] We have sent
down for those who divide themselves into bandsa91and abuse the
Qur ᾿anb––92by your Lord, We will question them all 93about their
deeds. 94So proclaim openly what you have been commanded [to
say], and ignore the idolaters. 95We are enough for you against all those
who ridicule your message, 96who set up another god beside God– –
they will come to know. 97We are well aware that your heart is
weighed down by what they say. 98Celebrate the glory of your Lord
and be among those who bow down to Him: 99worship your
Lord until what is certain comes to you.
aThis refers to some disbelievers who organized themselves into groups to meet
pilgrims and warn them against the Qur ᾿an.
bThere are two interpretations of the word ῾idina  given by Razi. One is ‘parts/
shreds’, the other is ‘lies/inventions’: ‘abuse’ covers both.Al-Hijr 165 15:9916. THE BEE
A Meccan sura. It takes its title from the bee (verses 68–9) inspired in its
remarkable way by God. This is just one of the numerous examples given in thissura of God’s grace and the many things man should be grateful for. The suracondemns the idolaters who attribute God’s bounty to other powers and worshipfalse deities. Abraham is given at the end as an example for the Muslimcommunity to follow. Until verse 88, the sura is directed at the polytheists; from
verse 90 onwards it teaches the Muslims in various ways. Verse 89 connects the
two parts by naming the Prophet as witness to the believers and disbelievers ofhis community.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1God’s Judgement is coming,a so do not ask to bring it on sooner.
Glory be to Him! He is far above anything they join with Him! 2He
sends down angels with inspiration at His command, to whichever ofHis servants He chooses, to give [His] warning: ‘There is no god butMe, so beware of Me.’ 3He created the heavens and earth for a true
purpose, and He is far above whatever they join with Him! 4He
created man from a drop of ﬂuid, and yet man openly challenges
Him. 5And livestock– –He created them too. You derive warmth
and other bene ﬁts from them: you get food from them; 6you ﬁnd
beauty in them when you bring them home to rest and when you
drive them out to pasture. 7They carry your loads to lands you
yourselves could not reach without great hardship– –truly your Lordis kind and merciful– – 8horses, mules, and donkeys for you to ride
and use for show, and other things you know nothing about. 9God
points out the right path, for some paths lead the wrong way: if Hewished, He could guide you all.
10It is He who sends down water for you from the sky, from which
comes a drink for you, and the shrubs that you feed to your animals.11With it He grows for you grain, olives, palms, vines, and all kinds
of other crops. There truly is a sign in this for those who re ﬂect. 12By
His command He has made the night and day, the sun, moon, andstars all of bene ﬁt to you. There truly are signs in this for those who
aThe Arabic verb ata is in the past tense to express inevitability and nearness.use their reason. 13He has made of bene ﬁt to you the many-coloured
things He has multiplied on the earth. There truly are signs in thisfor those who take it to heart. 14It is He who made the sea of bene ﬁt
to you: you eat fresh ﬁsh from it and bring out jewellery to wear; you
see the ships cutting through its waves so that you may go in searchof His bounty and give thanks. 15He has made mountains stand ﬁrm
on the earth, to prevent it shaking under you, and rivers and paths so
that you may ﬁnd your way, 16and landmarks and stars to guide
people. 17Can He who creates be compared to one who cannot
create? Why do you not take heed?
18If you tried to count God’s blessings, you could never take them
all in: He is truly most forgiving and most merciful. 19He knows
what you conceal and what you reveal. 20Those they invoke beside
God create nothing; they are themselves created. 21They are dead,
not living. They do not know when they will be raised up. 22Your
God is the One God. As for those who deny the life to come, theirhearts refuse to admit the truth and they are arrogant. 23There is no
doubt that God knows what they conceal and what they reveal. Hedoes not love the arrogant.
24When they are asked, ‘What has your Lord sent down?’ they say,
‘Ancient fables.’ 25On the Day of Resurrection they will bear the full
weight of their own burden, as well as some of the burden of those
they misled with no true knowledge. How terrible their burden willbe! 26Those who went before them also schemed, but God attacked
the very foundations of what they built. The roof fell down on them:punishment came on them from unimagined directions. 27In the
end, on the Day of Resurrection, He will shame them, saying,‘Where are these “partners” of Mine on whose account you opposed[Me]?’ Those given knowledge will say, ‘Shame and misery on thedisbelievers today!’ 28Those whose lives the angels take while they
are wronging themselves will show submission: ‘We were doing noevil.’ ‘Yes you were: God knows fully everything that you have done,29so enter the gates of Hell. There you will remain– – the home of the
arrogant is evil indeed.’
30But when the righteous are asked, ‘What has your Lord sent
down?’ they will say, ‘All that is good.’ There is a reward in thispresent world for those who do good, but their home in the Here-
after is far better: the home of the righteous is excellent. 31They will
enter perpetual Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams. There theyThe Bee
167 16:31will have everything they wish. This is the way God rewards the
righteous, 32those whose lives the angels take in a state of goodness.
They will say to them, ‘Peace be upon you. Enter the Garden as areward for what you have done.’ 33Are the disbelievers waiting for
the angels to come to them, or your Lord’s Judgement? Those whowent before them did the same. God did not wrong them; theywronged themselves. 34So the evil they had done hit them and they
were surrounded by the very thing they had mocked.
35Those who worshipped others alongside God say, ‘If God had
willed, we would not have worshipped anything but Him, norwould our fathers. We would not have declared anything forbiddenwithout His sanction.’ Those before them said the same. Are themessengers obliged to do anything other than deliver [their message]clearly? 36We sent a messenger to every community, saying, ‘Worship
God and shun false gods.’ Among them were some God guided;misguidance took hold of others. So travel through the earth and seewhat was the fate of those who denied the truth. 37Though you
[Prophet] may be eager to guide them, God does not guide those
who misguide [others],
a nor will they have anyone to help them.
38They have sworn by God with their strongest oaths that He will
not raise the dead to life. But He will– – it is His binding promise,
though most people do not realize it– –39in order to make clear for
them what they have di ﬀered about and so that the disbelievers may
realize that what they said was false. 40When We will something to
happen, all that We say is, ‘Be,’ and it is. 41As for those who emi-
grated in God’s cause after being wronged, We shall give them agood home in this world, but the reward of the Hereafter will be fargreater, if they only knew it. 42They are the ones who are steadfast
and put their trust in their Lord.
43[Prophet], all the messengers We sent before you were simply
men to whom We had given the Revelation: you [people] can askthose who have knowledge if you do not know. 44We sent them with
clear signs and scriptures. We have sent down the message to you too[Prophet], so that you can explain to people what was sent for them,so that they may re ﬂect.
45Are those who plan evil so sure that God will not make the earth
swallow them up, that punishment will not come on them from some
aCf. verse 25.The Qur ᾿an 16:32 168unimagined direction, 46that it will not catch them suddenly in the
midst of their comings and goings– – for they cannot frustrate God– –
47or that it will not catch up with them gradually? Indeed your Lord
is kind and merciful. 48Do the [disbelievers] not observe the things
that God has created, casting their shadows right and left, submit-ting themselves to God obediently? 49It is to God that everything in
the heavens and earth submits, every beast that moves, even the
angels– – they are free from arrogance: 50they fear their Lord above
them, and they do as they are commanded.
51God said, ‘Do not take two gods’– – for He is the One God– –‘ I
alone am the One that you should hold in awe.’ 52Everything in
the heavens and earth belongs to Him: everlasting obedience is His
right. Will you heed anyone other than God? 53Whatever good
things you possess come from God, and when hardship a ﬄicts
you, it is to Him alone you cry out for help, 54yet when He has
relieved you of your hardship– – lo and behold!– – some of you
attribute partners to your Lord. 55Let them show ingratitude for
the favours We have shown them; ‘Enjoy your brief time– – soon
you will know.’
56They set aside part of the sustenance We give them, for [idols]
about which they have no true knowledge.
a By God! You will be
questioned about your false inventions. 57They assign daughters
to Godb– –may He be exalted!– –and the [sons] they desire to them-
selves. 58When one of them is given news of the birth of a baby girl,
his face darkens and he is ﬁlled with gloom. 59In his shame he hides
himself away from his people because of the bad news he has beengiven. Should he keep her and su ﬀer contempt or bury her in the
dust? How ill they judge! 60Those who do not believe in the Here-
after should have the contemptible image, and God should have thehighest one:
c He is the Mighty, the Wise. 61If God took people to
task for the evil they do, He would not leave one living creature onearth, but He reprieves them until an appointed time: when theirtime comes they cannot delay it for a moment nor can they bring it
aThe pagan Arabs gave part of their crops and livestock to their deities ( 6:136).
bSome of the pagan Arabs called angels the daughters of God. This is doubly
blasphemous because of the contempt in which daughters were held in a warriorcommunity, to the extent of female infanticide as described below.
cTheir image of God is that He can only have daughters, though they themselves
have contempt for their daughters.The Bee 169 16:61forward. 62They attribute to God what they themselves dislike while
their own tongues utter the lie that the besta belongs to them. With-
out doubt it is the Fire that belongs to them: they will be givenpriority there!
b
63By God,c We have sent messengers before you [Muhammad] to
other communities, but Satan made their foul deeds seem alluringto them. He is the patron of these present disbelievers
d too, and
a painful punishment awaits them all. 64We have sent down the
Scripture to you only to make clear to them what they di ﬀer about,
and as guidance and mercy to those who believe.
65It is God who sends water down from the sky and with it revives
the earth when it is dead. There truly is a sign in this for people wholisten. 66In livestock, too, you have a lesson– – We give you a drink
from the contents of their bellies, between waste matter and blood,
pure milk, sweet to the drinker. 67From the fruits of date palms and
grapes you take sweet juice
e and wholesome provisions. There truly
is a sign in this for people who use their reason. 68And your Lord
inspired the bee, saying, ‘Build yourselves houses in the mountainsand trees and what people construct. 69Then feed on all kinds
of fruit and follow the ways made easy for you by your Lord.’From their bellies comes a drink of di ﬀerent colours in which
there is healing for people. There truly is a sign in this for thosewho think.
70It is God who has created you and in time will cause you to die.
Some of you will be reduced, in old age, to a most abject state, sothat, after having knowledge, they will know nothing at all: God istruly all knowing and all powerful. 71God has given some of you
more provision than others. Those who have been given more areunwilling to pass their provision on to the slaves they possess so thatthey become their equals. How can they refuse to acknowledgeGod’s blessings? 72And it is God who has given you spouses from
amongst yourselves and through them He has given you children
and grandchildren and provided you with good things. How can they
ai.e. sons.
bThis meaning of farata  is supported by Razi.
cThe disbelievers used to swear by their idols, so here God swears by Himself.
dThis refers to the disbelievers of Mecca.
eThe Arabic word sakar  means ‘wine’, ‘juice’, or ‘vinegar’ ( al-Mu ῾jam al-Wasit ).The Qur ᾿an 16:62 170believe in falsehood and deny God’s blessings?a73Those they worship
beside God have no power to provide anything for them from theheavens or the earth: they can do nothing. 74So do not make up
images about God: God knows and you do not.
75God presents this illustration: a slave controlled by his master,
with no power over anything, and another man We have suppliedwith good provision, from which he gives alms privately and openly.Can they be considered equal? All praise belongs to God, but mostof them do not recognize this. 76God presents another illustration:
two men, one of them dumb, unable to do anything, a burden to his
carer– – whatever task he directs him to, he achieves nothing good– –
can he be considered equal to one who commands justice and is on
the straight path? 77All that is hidden from view in the heavens and
earth belongs to God. The coming of the Hour of Judgement is likethe blink of an eye, or even quicker: God has power over everything.78It is God who brought you out of your mothers’ wombs knowing
nothing, and gave you hearing and sight and minds, so that youmight be thankful. 79Do they not see the birds made to ﬂy through
the air in the sky? Nothing holds them up except God. There trulyare signs in this for those who believe. 80It is God who has given you
a place of rest in your homes and from the skins of animals made
you homes that you ﬁnd light [to handle] when you travel and when
you set up camp; furnishings and comfort for a while from theirwool, fur, and hair. 81It is God who has given you shade from what
He has created, and places of shelter in the mountains; garments toprotect you from the heat, and garments to protect you in your wars.In this way He perfects His blessings on you, so that you may devoteyourselves to Him. 82But if they turn away [Prophet], your only duty
is to deliver the message clearly. 83They know God’s blessings, but
refuse to recognize them: most of them are ungrateful.
84The day will come when We raise up a witness from every
community, when the disbelievers will not be allowed to makeexcuses or amends. 85When the evildoers face punishment it will
not be lightened for them nor will they be given any respite. 86When
the idolaters see the partners they joined with God they will say,‘Our Lord, these are the partners we used to invoke beside You,’
ai.e. claim that the partners they ascribe to God are the ones to give them such
blessings.The Bee 171 16:86but the partners will retort, ‘You are liars,’ 87and on that Day they
will o ﬀer total submission to God: their false deities will desert
them. 88Because of the corruption they spread, We shall add torment
upon torment for those who disbelieved and barred others from thepath of God.
89The day will come when We raise up in each community a
witness against them, and We shall bring you [Prophet] as a witness
against these people, for We have sent the Scripture down to youexplaining everything, and as guidance and mercy and good news to
those who devote themselves to God.
90God commands justice, doing good, and generosity towards
relatives and He forbids what is shameful, blameworthy, and oppres-
sive. He teaches you, so that you may take heed. 91Fulﬁl any pledge
you make in God’s name and do not break oaths after you havesworn them, for you have made God your surety: God knows every-thing you do. 92Do not use your oaths to deceive each other– – like a
woman who unravels the thread she has ﬁrmly spun– – just because
one party may be more numerous than another. God tests you withthis, and on the Day of the Resurrection He will make clear to youthose things you di ﬀered about.
93If God so willed, He would have made you all one people, but
He leaves to stray whoever He will and guides whoever He will. You
will be questioned about your deeds. 94Do not use your oaths to
deceive each other lest any foot should slip after being ﬁrmly placed
and lest you should taste the penalty for having hindered others fromthe path of God, and su ﬀer terrible torment. 95Do not sell for a small
price any pledge made in God’s name: what God has [to give] isbetter for you, if you only knew. 96What you have runs out but what
God has endures, and We shall certainly reward those who remainsteadfast according to the best of their actions. 97To whoever, male or
female, does good deeds and has faith, We shall give a good life and
reward them according to the best of their actions.
98[Prophet], when you recite the Qur ᾿an, seek God’s protection
from the outcast, Satan. 99He has no power over those who believe
and trust in their Lord; 100his power is only over those who ally
themselves with him and those who, because of him, join partnerswith God. 101When We substitute one revelation for another– –
and God knows best what He reveals– – they say, ‘You are just making
it up,’ but most of them have no knowledge. 102Say that the HolyThe Qur ᾿an 16:87 172Spirita has brought the Revelation with the Truth step by step from
your Lord, to strengthen the believers and as guidance and goodnews to the devout. 103We know very well that they say, ‘It is a man
who teaches him,’ but the language of the person they allude to isforeign, while this revelation is in clear Arabic. 104If people do not
believe in God’s revelation, God does not guide them, and a painfulpunishment awaits them. 105Falsehood is fabricated only by those
who do not believe in God’s revelation: they are the liars. 106With the
exception of those who are forced to say they do not believe,
although their hearts remain ﬁrm in faith, those who reject God after
believing in Him and open their hearts to disbelief will have thewrath of God upon them and a grievous punishment awaiting them.
107This is because they love the life of this world more than the one
to come, and God does not guide those who reject Him. 108These are
people whose hearts, hearing, and sight have been closed o ﬀ by God:
they are heedless, 109and there is no doubt that they will be the losers
in the Hereafter. 110But your Lord will be most forgiving and most
merciful to those who leave their homes after persecution, then striveand remain steadfast. 111On the Day when every soul will come
pleading for itself, every soul will be paid in full for all its actions– –
they will not be wronged. 112God presents the example of a town that
was secure and at ease, with provisions coming to it abundantly from
all places. Then it became ungrateful for God’s blessings, so Godaﬄicted it with the garment of famine and fear, for what its people
had done. 113A messenger who was one of them came to them, but
they called him a liar. So punishment overwhelmed them in themidst of their evildoing.
114So eat of the good and lawful things God has provided for you
and be thankful for His blessings,
b if it is Him that you worship. 115He
has forbidden you only these things: carrion, blood, pig’s meat, andanimals over which any name other than God’s has been invoked.But if anyone is forced by hunger, not desiring it nor exceeding
their immediate need, God is forgiving and merciful. 116Do not say
falsely, ‘This is lawful and that is forbidden,’ inventing a lie aboutGod: those who invent lies about God will not prosper– –117they
may have a little enjoyment, but painful punishment awaits them.
aThis refers to the Angel Gabriel.
bUnlike the ungrateful people just mentioned.The Bee 173 16:117118[Prophet], We forbade the Jews what We told you about.a We did
not wrong them; they wronged themselves. 119But towards those
who do wrong out of ignorance, and afterwards repent and makeamends, your Lord is most forgiving and merciful.
120Abraham was truly an example: devoutly obedient to God and
true in faith. He was not an idolater; 121he was thankful for the
blessings of God who chose him and guided him to a straight path.
122We gave him blessings in this world, and he is among the right-
eous in the Hereafter. 123Then We revealed to you [Muhammad],
‘Follow the creed of Abraham, a man of pure faith who was not an
idolater.’ 124The Sabbath was made obligatory only for those who
diﬀered about it. On the Day of Resurrection your Lord will judge
between them as to their di ﬀerences.
125[Prophet], call [people] to the way of your Lord with wisdom
and good teaching. Argue with them in the most courteous way, foryour Lord knows best who has strayed from His way and who isrightly guided. 126If you [believers] have to respond to an attack,
make your response proportionate, but it is best to stand fast. 127So
[Prophet] be steadfast: your steadfastness comes only from God. Donot grieve over them; do not be distressed by their scheming, 128for
God is with those who are mindful of Him and who do good.
aIn an earlier revelation (see 6:146).The Qur ᾿an 16:118 17417. THE NIGHT JOURNEY
A Meccan sura framed by references to the Children of Israel at the beginning,
and to Pharaoh at the end. The bulk of the sura deals with the Qur ᾿an as
guidance and warning, Muhammad, and the nature of prophecy, especially thefact that he is a human being and incapable himself of producing miracles. Italso warns of Iblis’s promise to tempt mankind and of the fate of the dis-believers, and it gives a series of commandments (verses 22–39). The Night
Journey, which gives the sura its title, is mentioned in verse 1 and again in verse
60. Towards the end of the Meccan period, God caused Muhammad, in the
space of a single night, to journey from Mecca to Jerusalem and from there to
heaven and back again.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Glory to Him who made His servant travel by night from the
sacred place of worshipa to the furthest place of worship,b whose
surroundings We have blessed, to show him some of Our signs: He
alone is the All Hearing, the All Seeing. 2We also gave Moses the
Scripture, and made it a guide for the Children of Israel. ‘Entrustyourselves to no one but Me, 3you descendants of those We carried
with Noah: he was truly a thankful servant.’
4We declared to the Children of Israel in the Scripture, ‘Twice
you will spread corruption in the land and become highly arrogant.’
5When the ﬁrst of these warnings was ful ﬁlled, We sent against you
servants of Ours with great force, and they ravaged your homes.That warning was ful ﬁlled, 6but then We allowed you to prevail
against your enemy. We increased your wealth and o ﬀspring and
made you more numerous– – 7whether you do good or evil it is to
your own souls– –and when the second warning was ful ﬁlled [We
sent them] to shame your faces and enter the place of worship as theydid the ﬁrst time, and utterly destroy whatever fell into their power.
8Your Lord may yet have mercy on you, but if you do the same
again, so shall We: We have made Hell a prison for those who defy[Our warning].
aIn Mecca.bIn Jerusalem.9This Qur ᾿an does indeed show the straightest way. It gives the
faithful who do right the good news that they will have a greatreward and 10warns that We have prepared an agonizing punish-
ment for those who do not believe in the world to come. 11Yet man
prays for harm, just as he prays for good: man is ever hasty. 12We
made the night and the day as two signs, then darkened the nightand made the daylight for seeing, for you to seek your Lord’s bountyand to know how to count the years and calculate. We haveexplained everything in detail. 13We have bound each human
being’s destiny to his neck. On the Day of Resurrection, We shall
bring out a record for each of them, which they will ﬁnd spread
wide open, 14‘Read your record. Today your own soul is enough to
calculate your account.’
15Whoever accepts guidance does so for his own good; whoever
strays does so at his own peril. No soul will bear another’s burden,nor do We punish until We have sent a messenger. 16When We
decide to destroy a town, We command those corrupted by wealth[to reform], but they [persist in their] disobedience; Our sentence ispassed, and We destroy them utterly. 17How many generations We
have destroyed since Noah! Your Lord knows and observes the sinsof His servants well enough. 18If anyone desires [only] the ﬂeeting
life, We speed up whatever We will in it, for whoever We wish; in the
end We have prepared Hell for him in which to burn, disgraced andrejected. 19But if anyone desires the life to come and strives after it as
he should, as a true believer, his striving will be thanked. 20To both
the latter and the former, We give some of your Lord’s bounty.[Prophet], your Lord’s bounty is not restricted– –21see how We have
given some more than others– – but the Hereafter holds greater ranks
and greater favours.
22Set up
a no other god beside God, or you will end up disgraced
and forsaken. 23Your Lord has commanded that you should worship
none but Him, and that you be kind to your parents. If either or bothof them reach old age with you, say no word that shows impatience
with them, and do not be harsh with them, but speak to them
respectfully 24and lower your wing in humility towards them in
kindness and say, ‘Lord, have mercy on them, just as they cared for
me when I was little.’ 25Your Lord knows best what is in your heart.
aThis verb is addressed to mankind as a whole (Razi).The Qur ᾿an 17:9 176If you are good, He is most forgiving to those who return to Him.
26Give relatives their due, and the needy, and travellers– – do not
squander your wealth wastefully: 27those who squander are the
brothers of Satan, and Satan is most ungrateful to his Lord– –28but
if, while seeking some bounty that you expect from your Lord, youturn them down, then at least speak some word of comfort to them.29Do not be tight- ﬁsted, nor so open-handed that you end up blamed
and overwhelmed with regret. 30Your Lord gives abundantly to who-
ever He will, and sparingly to whoever He will: He knows and
observes His servants thoroughly.
31Do not kill your children for fear of poverty
a– –We shall provide
for them and for you– –killing them is a great sin. 32And do not go
anywhere near adultery: it is an outrage, and an evil path. 33Do not
take life, which God has made sacred, except by right: if anyone iskilled wrongfully, We have given authority to the defender of hisrights, but he should not be excessive in taking life, for he is alreadyaided [by God]. 34Do not go near the orphan’s property,
b except
with the best [intentions], until he reaches the age of maturity.Honour your pledges: you will be questioned about your pledges.
35Give full measure when you measure, and weigh with accurate
scales: that is better and fairer in the end. 36Do not follow blindly
what you do not know to be true: ears, eyes, and heart, you will bequestioned about all these. 37Do not strut arrogantly about the earth:
you cannot break it open, nor match the mountains in height. 38The
evil of all these actions is hateful to your Lord.
39[Prophet], this is some of the wisdom your Lord has revealed to
you: do not set up another god beside God, or you will be throwninto Hell, blamed and rejected. 40What? Has your Lord favoured you
people with sons and taken daughters for Himself from the angels?
c
What a monstrous thing for you to say!
41We have explained things in various ways in this Qur ᾿an, so that
such people might take notice, but it has only turned them furtheraway. 42Say, ‘If there were other gods along with Him, as they say
there are, then they would have tried to ﬁnd a way to the Lord of
the Throne.’ 43Glory to Him! He is far above what they say! 44The
seven heavens and the earth and everyone in them glorify Him.
There is not a single thing that does not celebrate His praise, though
aSee81:8–9.bCf. 4:2.cSee also 16:57–62.The Night Journey 177 17:44you do not understand their praise: He is most forbearing, most
forgiving.
45[Prophet], when you recite the Qur ᾿an, We put an invisible
barrier between you and those who do not believe in the life to come.46We have put covers on their hearts that prevent them from under-
standing it, and heaviness in their ears. When you mention yourLord in the Qur ᾿an, and Him alone, they turn their backs and run
away. 47We know best the way they listen, when they listen to you
and when they confer in secret, and these wrongdoers say, ‘You are
only following a man who is bewitched.’ 48See what they think you
are like! But they are lost and cannot ﬁnd the right way. 49They also
say, ‘What? When we are turned to bones and dust, shall we really be
raised up in a new act of creation?’ 50Say, ‘[Yes] even if you were [as
hard as] stone, or iron, 51or any other substance you think hard to
bring to life.’ Then they will say, ‘Who will bring us back?’ Say, ‘TheOne who created you the ﬁrst time.’ Then they will shake their heads
at you and say, ‘When will that be?’ Say, ‘It may well be very soon:52it will be the Day when He calls you, and you answer by praising
Him, and you think you have stayed [on earth] only a little while.’
53[Prophet], tell My servants to say what is best.
a Satan sows
discord among them: Satan is a sworn enemy of man. 54Your Lord
has the most knowledge about all of you: if He pleases He will havemercy on you, and if He pleases He will punish you. [Prophet], Wedid not send you to take charge of them. 55Your Lord knows best
about everyone in the heavens and the earth. We gave some prophetsmore than others: We gave David a book [of Psalms].
b56Say, ‘Call
upon those you claim to be deities beside God: they have no power toremove or avert any harm from you.’ 57Those [angels]
c they pray to
are themselves seeking a way to their Lord, even those who areclosest to Him. They hope for His mercy and fear His punishment.The punishment of your Lord is much to be feared: 58there is no
community
d We shall not destroy, or punish severely, before the Day
of Resurrection– – this is written in the Book.e
59Nothing prevents Us from sending miraculous signs,f except
aIn arguing about religion and proving it as God has shown here. See 16:125;29:46.
bSee also 4:163–6.cSee verse 40.
dOf evildoers. See 18:16;7:101.
eGod’s divine Record.
fSee2:118 for signs demanded by those without knowledge.The Qur ᾿an 17:45 178the fact that previous peoples denied them. We gave the people of
Thamud the she-camel as a clear sign, yet they maltreated it. Wesend signs only to give warning. 60[Prophet], We have told you that
your Lord knows all about human beings. The vision We showedyou
a was only a test for people, as was the cursed tree [mentioned] in
the Qur ᾿an.b We warn them, but this only increases their insolence.
61When We said to the angels, ‘Bow down before Adam,’ they all
bowed down, but not Iblis. He retorted, ‘Why should I bow down tosomeone You have created out of clay?’ 62and [then] said, ‘You see
this being You have honoured above me? If You reprieve me until theDay of Resurrection, I will lead all but a few of his descendants bythe nose.’ 63God said, ‘Go away! Hell will be your reward, and the
reward of any of them who follow you– – an ample reward. 64Rouse
whichever of them you can with your voice, muster your cavalry andinfantry against them, share their wealth and their children with
them, and make promises to them– – Satan promises them nothing
but delusion– –65but you will have no authority over My [true]
servants: Your Lord can take care of them well enough.’
66[People], it is your Lord who makes ships go smoothly for you
on the sea so that you can seek His bounty: He is most mercifultowards you. 67When you get into distress at sea, those you pray to
besides Him desert you, but when He brings you back safe to landyou turn away: man is ever ungrateful. 68Can you be sure that God
will not have you swallowed up into the earth when you are back onland, or that He will not send a sandstorm against you? Then youwillﬁnd no one to protect you. 69Or can you be sure that He will
not send you back out to sea, and send a violent storm against youto drown you for being so ungrateful? You will ﬁnd no helper
against Us there. 70We have honoured the children of Adam and
carried them by land and sea; We have provided good sustenancefor them and favoured them specially above many of those We havecreated.
71On the Day when We summon each community, along with its
leader,
c those who are given their record in their right hand will read
aThe vision he was shown on the Night Journey.
bSaid to refer to the tree of Zaqqum in Hell (see 56:52;44:43–6). The eater will curse
its fruits (Razi). Both the vision and the tree in Hell were objects of derision for thedisbelievers.
cSee16:89.The Night Journey 179 17:71it [with pleasure].a But no one will be wronged in the least: 72those
who were blind in this life will be blind in the Hereafter, and evenfurther o ﬀ the path. 73[Prophet], the disbelievers tried to tempt you
away from what We revealed to you, so that you would invent someother revelation and attribute it to Us and then they would havetaken you as a friend. 74If We had not made you stand ﬁrm, you
would almost have inclined a little towards them. 75In that case, We
would have made you taste a double punishment in this life, and adouble punishment after death and then you would have found no
one to help you against Us. 76They planned to scare you o ﬀ the land,
but they would not have lasted for more than a little while after you.77Such was Our way with the messengers We sent before you, and
you will ﬁnd no change in Our ways.
78So perform the regular prayers in the period from the time the
sun is past its zenith till the darkness of the night, and [recite] theQur ᾿an at dawn– – dawn recitation is always witnessed
b––79and dur-
ing the night wake up and pray, as an extra o ﬀering of your own, so
that your Lord may raise you to a [highly] praised status. 80Say,
‘My Lord, make me go in truthfully, and come out truthfully, andgrant me supporting authority from You.’ 81And say, ‘The truth
has come, and falsehood has passed away: falsehood is bound topass away.’
82We send down the Qur ᾿an as healing and mercy to those who
believe; as for those who disbelieve, it only increases their loss.83When We favour man he turns arrogantly to one side, but when
harm touches him, he falls into despair. 84Say, ‘Everyone does
things their own way, but your Lord is fully aware of who follows thebest-guided path.’
85[Prophet], they ask you about the Spirit. Say, ‘The Spirit is part
of my Lord’s domain. You have only been given a little knowledge.’86If We pleased, We could take away what We have revealed to you– –
then you would ﬁnd no one to plead for you against Us– –87if it were
not for your Lord’s mercy: His favour to you has been truly great.88Say, ‘Even if all mankind and jinn came together to produce
something like this Qur ᾿an, they could not produce anything like it,
however much they helped each other.’ 89In this Qur ᾿an, We have set
aCf. 69:19–24.
bBy the angels. See Bukhari, Sahih ,‘Mawaqit ’,16.The Qur ᾿an 17:72 180out all kinds of examples for people, yet most of them persist in
disbelieving. 90They say, ‘We will not believe for you [Muhammad]
until you make a spring gush out of the ground for us; 91or until you
have a garden of date palms and vines, and make rivers pour throughthem; 92or make the sky fall on us in pieces, as you claimed will
happen; or bring God and the angels before us face to face; 93or have
a house made of gold; or ascend into the sky– – even then, we will not
believe in your ascension until you send a real book down for usto read.’ Say, ‘Glory be to my Lord! Am I anything but a mortal, a
messenger?’ 94The only thing that kept these people from believing,
when guidance came to them, was that they said, ‘How could Godhave sent a human being as a messenger?’ 95Say, ‘If there were angels
walking about on earth, feeling at home, We would have sent them an
angel from Heaven as a messenger.’ 96Say, ‘God is witness enough
between me and you. He knows and observes His servants well.’
97[Prophet], anyone God guides is truly guided, and you will ﬁnd
no protector other than Him for anyone He leaves astray. On the Dayof Resurrection We shall gather them, lying on their faces, blind,dumb, and deaf. Hell will be their Home. Whenever the Fire goesdown, We shall make it blaze more ﬁercely for them. 98This is what
they will get for rejecting Our signs and saying, ‘What? When we are
turned to bones and dust, how can we be raised in a new act of
creation?’ 99Do they not see that God, who created the heavens and
earth, can create the likes of them [anew]? He has ordained a time forthem– – there is no doubt about that– – but the evildoers refuse every-
thing except disbelief. 100Say, ‘If you possessed the very stores of my
Lord’s bounty, you would hold them back in your fear of spending:man is ever grudging.’
101In the past, We gave Moses nine clear signs– – ask the Children
of Israel. When Moses came to [the Egyptians], Pharaoh said to him,‘Moses, I think you are bewitched.’ 102He said, ‘You know very well
that only the Lord of the heavens and earth could have sent thesesigns as clear proof. I think that you, Pharaoh, are doomed.’ 103So he
wanted to wipe them o ﬀ the [face of the] earth, but We drowned him
and those with him. 104After his death, We told the Children of
Israel, ‘Live in the land, and when the promise of the Hereafter isfulﬁlled, We shall bring you to the assembly of all people.’
105We sent down the Qur ᾿an with the truth, and with the truth it
has come down– – [Prophet], We sent you only to give good news andThe Night Journey
181 17:105warning– –106it is a recitation that We have revealed in parts, so that
you can recite it to people at intervals; We have sent it down little bylittle. 107Say, ‘Whether you believe it or not, those who were given
knowledge earlier fall down on their faces when it is recited to them,108and say, “Glory to our Lord! Our Lord’s promise has been ful-
ﬁlled.” 109They fall down on their faces, weeping, and [the Qur ᾿an]
increases their humility.’ 110Say [to them], ‘Call on God, or on the
Lord of Mercy– – whatever names you call Him, the best names
belong to Him.’ [Prophet], do not be too loud in your prayer, or too
quiet, but seek a middle way 111and say, ‘Praise belongs to God, who
has no child nor partner in His rule. He is not so weak as to need aprotector. Proclaim His limitless greatness!’The Qur ᾿an 17:106 18218. THE CAVE
A Meccan sura which gets its name from the Sleepers of the Cave, whose story
takes a prominent place in the sura (verses 9–26). This sura also deals with two
other stories: Moses’ meeting with an unidenti ﬁedﬁgure (verses 60–82), and
the story of Dhu ’l-Qarnayn (verses 83–99). A parable is put forward for the
people of Mecca: the parable of the luscious gardens belonging to an arrogantand ungrateful man, which God reduces to dust. The sura opens and closes withreferences to the Qur ᾿an itself.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Praise be to God, who sent down the Scripture to His servant and
made it unerringly straight, 2warning of severe punishment from
Him, and [giving] glad news to the believers who do good deeds– –anexcellent reward 3that they will always enjoy. 4It warns those people
who assert, ‘God has o ﬀspring.’
a5They have no knowledge about
this, nor did their forefathers– –it is a monstrous assertion that comesout of their mouths: what they say is nothing but lies. 6But [Prophet]
are you going to worry yourself to death over them if they do notbelieve in this message?
7We have adorned the earth with attractive things so that We may
test people to ﬁnd out which of them do best, 8but We shall reduce
all this to barren dust. 9[Prophet], do you ﬁnd the Companions in the
Cave and al-Raqim
b so wondrous, among all Our other signs?
10When the young men sought refuge in the cave and said, ‘Our
Lord, grant us Your mercy, and ﬁnd us a good way out of our ordeal,’
11We sealed their ears [with sleep] in the cave for years. 12Then We
woke them so that We could make clear which of the two partiesc was
better able to work out how long they had been there.
13[Prophet], We shall tell you their story as it really was. They
were young men who believed in their Lord, and We gave them more
aWalad  in classical Arabic applies to masculine and feminine, singular and plural. As
this sura is Meccan, it most probably refers to Meccan claims that the angels aredaughters of God.
bAl-Raqim is variously interpreted as being the name of the mountain in which the
cave was situated, the name of their dog, or an inscription bearing their names.
cSee verse 19.and more guidance. 14We gave strength to their hearts when they
stood up and said, ‘Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and earth.We shall never call upon any god other than Him, for that would bean outrageous thing to do. 15These people of ours have taken gods
other than Him. Why do they not produce clear evidence aboutthem? Who could be more unjust than someone who makes up liesabout God? 16Now that you have left such people, and what they
worshipped instead of God, take refuge in the cave. God will showerHis mercy on you and make you an easy way out of your ordeal.’
17You could have seen the [light of the] sun as it rose, moving away
to the right of their cave, and when it set, moving away to the left ofthem, while they lay in the wide space inside the cave. (This is one
of God’s signs: those people God guides are rightly guided, but you
willﬁnd no protector to lead to the right path those He leaves to
stray.) 18You would have thought they were awake, though they lay
asleep. We turned them over, to the right and the left, with their dogstretching out its forelegs at the entrance. If you had seen them, youwould have turned and run away, ﬁlled with fear of them.
19In time We woke them, and they began to question one another.
One of them asked, ‘How long have you been here?’ and [some]answered, ‘A day or part of a day,’ but then [others] said, ‘Your Lordknows best how long you have been here. One of you go to thecity with your silver coins, ﬁnd out where the best food is there,
and bring some back. But be careful not to let anyone know aboutyou: 20if they found you out, they would stone you or force you to
return to their religion, where you would never come to any good.’21In this way We brought them to people’s attention so that they
might know that God’s promise [of resurrection] is true and thatthere is no doubt about the Last Hour, [though] people argue amongthemselves.
[Some] said, ‘Construct a building over them: their Lord knows
best about them.’ Those who prevailed said, ‘We shall build a placeof worship over them.’ 22[Some] say, ‘The sleepers were three, and
their dog made four,’ others say, ‘They were ﬁve, and the dog made
six’–– guessing in the dark– – and some say, ‘They were seven, and
their dog made eight.’ Say [Prophet], ‘My Lord knows best howmany they were.’ Only a few have real knowledge about them,
so do not argue, but stick to what is clear, and do not ask any ofthese people about them; 23do not say of anything, ‘I will do thatThe Qur ᾿an 18:14 184tomorrow,’a24without adding, ‘God willing,’ and, whenever you
forget, remember your Lord and say, ‘May my Lord guide me closerto what is right.’ 25[Some say], ‘The sleepers stayed in their cave
for three hundred years,’ some added nine more. 26Say [Prophet],
‘God knows best how long they stayed.’ His is the knowledge of allthat is hidden in the heavens and earth– – How well He sees! How
well He hears!– – and they have no one to protect them other than
Him; He does not allow anyone to share His rule.
27[Prophet], follow what has been revealed to you of your Lord’s
Scripture: there is no changing His words, nor can you ﬁnd any
refuge except with Him. 28Content yourself with those who pray to
their Lord morning and evening, seeking His approval, and do not
let your eyes turn away from them out of desire for the attractions of
this worldly life:
b do not yield to those whose hearts We have made
heedless of Our Qur ᾿an, those who follow their own low desires,
those whose ways are unbridled. 29Say, ‘Now the truth has come
from your Lord: let those who wish to believe in it do so, and letthose who wish to reject it do so.’ We have prepared a Fire for thewrongdoers that will envelop them from all sides. If they call forrelief, they will be relieved with water like molten metal, scaldingtheir faces. What a terrible drink! What a painful resting place! 30As
for those who believe and do good deeds– – We do not let the reward
of anyone who does a good deed go to waste– –31they will have
Gardens of lasting bliss graced with ﬂowing streams. There they will
be adorned with bracelets of gold. There they will wear green gar-ments of ﬁne silk and brocade. There they will be comfortably seated
on soft chairs. What a blessed reward! What a pleasant resting place!
32Tell them the parable of two men: for one of them We made two
gardens of grape vines, surrounded them with date palms, and putcorn ﬁelds in between; 33both gardens yielded fruit and did not fail
in any way; We made a stream ﬂow through them, 34and so he had
abundant fruit. One day, while talking to his friend, he said, ‘I havemore wealth and a larger following than you.’ 35He went into his
garden and wronged himself by saying, ‘I do not think this will ever
aWhen the Prophet was challenged by the Meccans, prompted by the Jews, to
explain the story of the Sleepers, he promised to do it ‘tomorrow’, but did not receiverevelation about it for some days afterwards.
bThe notables of Mecca tried to persuade the Prophet to attend to them and drive
away his humble followers. See 17:73–4,80:1–10.The Cave 185 18:35perish, 36or that the Last Hour will ever come– – even if I were to be
taken back to my Lord, I would certainly ﬁnd something even better
there.’ 37His companion retorted, ‘Have you no faith in Him who
created you from dust, from a small drop of ﬂuid, then shaped you
into a man? 38But, for me, He is God, my Lord, and I will never set
up any partner with Him. 39If only, when you entered your garden,
you had said, “This is God’s will. There is no power not [given] by
God.” Although you see I have less wealth and o ﬀspring than you,
40my Lord may well give me something better than your garden, and
send thunderbolts on your garden from the sky, so that it becomes a
heap of barren dust; 41or its water may sink so deep into the ground
that you will never be able to reach it again.’ 42And so it was: his fruit
was completely destroyed, and there he was, wringing his hands over
what he had invested in it, as it drooped on its trellises, and saying, ‘Iwish I had not set up any partner to my Lord.’ 43He had no forces to
help him other than God– – he could not even help himself. 44In that
situation, the only protection is that of God, the True God: He givesthe best rewards and the best outcome.
45Tell them, too, what the life of this world is like: We send water
down from the skies and the earth’s vegetation absorbs it, but soonthe plants turn to dry stubble scattered about by the wind: God haspower over everything. 46Wealth and children are the attractions of
this worldly life, but lasting good works have a better reward withyour Lord and give better grounds for hope. 47One day We shall make
the mountains move, and you will see the earth as an open plain. Weshall gather all people together, leaving no one. 48They will be lined
up before your Lord: ‘Now you have come to Us as We ﬁrst created
you, although you claimed We had not made any such appointmentfor you.’ 49The record of their deeds will be laid open and you will
see the guilty, dismayed at what they contain, saying, ‘Woe to us!What a record this is! It does not leave any deed, small or large,unaccounted for!’ They will ﬁnd everything they ever did laid in
front of them: your Lord will not be unjust to anyone.
50We said to the angels, ‘Bow down before Adam,’ and they all
bowed down, but not Iblis: he was one of the jinn and he disobeyed
his Lord’s command. Are you [people] going to take him and hisoﬀspring as your masters instead of Me, even though they are your
enemies? What a bad bargain for the evildoers! 51I did not make
them witnesses to the creation of the heavens and earth, nor to theirThe Qur ᾿an 18:36 186own creation; I do not take as My supporters those who lead others
astray. 52On the Day God will say, ‘Call on those you claimed were
My partners,’ they will call them but they will not answer; We shallset a deadly gulf between them. 53The evildoers will see the Fire and
they will realize that they are about to fall into it: they will ﬁnd no
escape from it.
54In this Qur ᾿an We have presented every kind of description for
people but man is more contentious than any other creature. 55Now
that guidance has come to them, what stops these people believing
and asking forgiveness from their Lord before the fate of earlier
peoples annihilates them or their torment confronts them? 56We only
send messengers to bring good news and to deliver warning, yet the
disbelievers seek to refute the truth with false arguments and make
fun of My messages and warnings. 57Who could be more wrong than
the person who is reminded of his Lord’s messages and turns hisback on them, ignoring what his hands are storing up for him [in theHereafter]? We have put covers over their hearts, so they cannotunderstand the Qur ᾿an, and We put heaviness in their ears: although
you call them to guidance [Prophet] they will never accept it. 58Your
Lord is the Most Forgiving, and full of mercy: if He took them totask for the wrongs they have done, He would hasten their punish-ment on. They have an appointed time from which they will have noescape, 59[just like] the former communities We destroyed for doing
wrong: We set an appointed time for their destruction.
60Moses said to his servant, ‘I will not rest until I reach the place
where the two seas meet, even if it takes me years!’ 61but when they
reached the place where the two seas meet, they had forgotten allabout their ﬁsh, which made its way into the sea and swam away.
62They journeyed on, and then Moses said to his servant, ‘Give us
our lunch! This journey of ours is very tiring,’ 63and [the servant]
said, ‘Remember when we were resting by the rock? I forgot theﬁsh–– Satan made me forget to pay attention to it– – and it [must
have] made its way into the sea.’ ‘How strange!’ 64Moses said, ‘Then
that was the place we were looking for.’ So the two turned back,
retraced their footsteps, 65and found one of Our servants– – a man
to whom We had granted Our mercy and whom We had givenknowledge of Our own. 66Moses said to him, ‘May I follow you so
that you can teach me some of the right guidance you have beentaught?’ 67The man said, ‘You will not be able to bear with meThe Cave
187 18:67patiently. 68How could you be patient in matters beyond your know-
ledge?’ 69Moses said, ‘God willing, you will ﬁnd me patient. I will
not disobey you in any way.’ 70The man said, ‘If you follow me then,
do not query anything I do before I mention it to you myself.’
71They travelled on. Later, when they got into a boat, and the man
made a hole in it, Moses said, ‘How could you make a hole in it? Doyou want to drown its passengers? What a strange thing to do!’ 72He
replied, ‘Did I not tell you that you would never be able to bear withme patiently?’ 73Moses said, ‘Forgive me for forgetting. Do not make
it too hard for me to follow you.’ 74And so they travelled on. Then,
when they met a young boy and the man killed him, Moses said,‘How could you kill an innocent person? He has not killed anyone!
What a terrible thing to do!’ 75He replied, ‘Did I not tell you that you
would never be able to bear with me patiently?’ 76Moses said, ‘From
now on, if I query anything you do, banish me from your company– –
you have put up with enough from me.’ 77And so they travelled on.
Then, when they came to a town and asked the inhabitants for foodbut were refused hospitality, they saw a wall there that was on thepoint of falling down and the man repaired it. Moses said, ‘But ifyou had wished you could have taken payment for doing that.’ 78He
said, ‘This is where you and I part company. I will tell you the
meaning of the things you could not bear with patiently: 79the boat
belonged to some needy people who made their living from the seaand I damaged it because I knew that coming after them was a kingwho was seizing every [serviceable] boat by force. 80The young boy
had parents who were people of faith, and so, fearing he wouldtrouble them through wickedness and disbelief, 81we wished that
their Lord should give them another child– – purer and more com-
passionate– – in his place. 82The wall belonged to two young orphans
in the town and there was buried treasure beneath it belonging tothem. Their father had been a righteous man, so your Lord intendedthem to reach maturity and then dig up their treasure as a mercyfrom your Lord. I did not do [these things] of my own accord: theseare the explanations for those things you could not bear with
patience.’
83[Prophet], they ask you about Dhu ’l-Qarnayn.
a Say, ‘I will tell
you something about him.’ 84We established his power in the land,
aLiterally ‘the two-horned one’, said by some to be Alexander the Great.The Qur ᾿an 18:68 188and gave him the means to achieve everything. 85He travelled on a
certain road; 86then, when he came to the setting of the sun, he
found it [seemed to be] setting into a muddy spring. Nearby hefound some people and We said, ‘Dhu ’l-Qarnayn, you may choose[which of them] to punish or show kindness to.’ 87He answered, ‘We
shall punish those who have done evil, and when they are returned totheir Lord He will punish them [even more] severely, 88while those
who believed and did good deeds will have the best of rewards: weshall command them to do what is easy for them.’ 89He travelled on;
90then, when he came to the rising of the sun, he found it rising on a
people for whom We had provided no shelter from it. 91And so it
was: We knew all about him.
92He travelled on; 93then, when he reached a place between two
mountain barriers, he found beside them a people who could barelyunderstand him. 94They said, ‘Dhu ’l-Qarnayn, Gog and Magog are
ruining this land. Will you build a barrier between them and us if wepay you a tribute?’ 95He answered, ‘The power my Lord has given
me is better than any tribute, but if you lend me your strength, I willput up a forti ﬁcation between you and them: 96bring me lumps of
iron!’ and then, when he had ﬁlled the gap between the two moun-
tainsides [he said], ‘Work your bellows!’ and then, when he had made
it glow like ﬁre, he said, ‘Bring me molten metal to pour over it!’
97Their enemies could not scale the barrier, nor could they pierce it,
98and he said, ‘This is a mercy from my Lord. But when my Lord’s
promise is ful ﬁlled, He will raze this barrier to the ground: my
Lord’s promise always comes true.’ 99On that Day, We shall let them
surge against each other like waves and then the Trumpet will beblown and We shall gather them all together. 100We shall show Hell to
the disbelievers, 101those whose eyes were blind to My signs, those
who were unable to hear. 102Did they think that they could take My
servants as masters instead of Me? We have prepared Hell as thedisbelievers’ resting place.
103Say [Prophet], ‘Shall we
a tell you who has the most to lose by
their actions, 104whose e ﬀorts in this world are misguided, even
when they think they are doing good work? 105It is those who dis-
believe in their Lord’s messages and deny that they will meet Him.’Their deeds come to nothing: on the Day of Resurrection We shall
aThis ‘we’ presumably refers to the Prophet and his community of believers.The Cave 189 18:105give them no weight. 106Their recompense for having disbelieved and
made fun of My messages and My messengers will be Hell. 107But
those who believe and do good deeds will be given the Gardens ofParadise. 108There they will remain, never wishing to leave.
109Say [Prophet], ‘If the whole ocean
a were ink for writing the
words of my Lord, it would run dry before those words wereexhausted’– – even if We were to add another ocean to it. 110Say, ‘I am
only a human being, like you, to whom it has been revealed that yourGod is One. Anyone who fears
b to meet his Lord should do good
deeds and give no one a share in the worship due to his Lord.
aThe term bahr refers to all wide expanses of water.
bSee note to 10:7.The Qur ᾿an 18:106 19019. MARY
A Meccan sura which takes its name from the story of Mary (verses 16–35). It
recounts the grace given by God to a number of prophets and tells aspects oftheir stories. The claim that Jesus is the son of God is ﬁrmly denied, as is the
assertion of the pagans of Mecca that the angels are God’s daughters. Fromverses 66 to 98 the sura discusses the arrogant assertions of the disbelievers
of Mecca. The Prophet is told that God’s punishment is coming to them andexhorted not to be impatient for it to arrive or to receive the revelation (verses64–5).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Kaf Ha Ya ῾Ayn Sad
2This is an account of your Lord’s grace towards His servant,
Zachariah, 3when he called to his Lord secretly, saying, 4‘Lord, my
bones have weakened and my hair is ashen grey, but never, Lord,have I ever prayed to You in vain: 5I fear [what] my kinsmen [will do]
when I am gone, for my wife is barren, so grant me a successor– –agift from You– – 6to be my heir and the heir of the family of Jacob.
Lord, make him well pleasing [to You].’ 7‘Zachariah, We bring you
good news of a son whose name will be John– –We have chosen this
name for no one before him.’ 8He said, ‘Lord, how can I have a son
when my wife is barren, and I am old and frail?’ 9He said, ‘This is
what your Lord has said: “It is easy for Me: I created you, thoughyou were nothing before.” ’
10He said, ‘Give me a sign, Lord.’ He said, ‘Your sign is that you
will not [be able to] speak to anyone for three full [days and] nights.’11He went out of the sanctuary to his people and signalled to them to
praise God morning and evening.
12[We said], ‘John, hold on to the Scripture ﬁrmly.’ While he was
still a boy, We granted him wisdom, 13tenderness from Us, and
purity. He was devout, 14kind to his parents, not domineering or
rebellious. 15Peace was on him the day he was born, the day he died,
and it will be on him the day he is raised to life again.
16Mention in the Qur ᾿an the story of Mary. She withdrew fromher family to a place to the east 17and secluded herself away; We sent
Our Spirit to appear before her in the form of a perfected man. 18She
said, ‘I seek the Lord of Mercy’s protection against you: if you haveany fear of Him [do not approach]!’ 19but he said, ‘I am but a Mes-
senger from your Lord, [come] to announce to you the gift of a pureson.’ 20She said, ‘How can I have a son when no man has touched
me? I have not been unchaste,’ 21and he said, ‘This is what your Lord
said: “It is easy for Me– – We shall make him a sign to all people, a
blessing from Us.”’ 22And so it was ordained: she conceived him.
She withdrew to a distant place 23and, when the pains of childbirth
drove her to [cling to] the trunk of a palm tree, she exclaimed, ‘I wishI had been dead and forgotten long before all this!’ 24but a voice cried
to her from below, ‘Do not worry: your Lord has provided a stream
at your feet 25and, if you shake the trunk of the palm tree towards
you, it will deliver fresh ripe dates for you, 26so eat, drink, be glad,
and say to anyone you may see: “I have vowed to the Lord of Mercyto abstain
a from conversation, and I will not talk to anyone today.”’
27She went back to her people carrying the child, and they said,
‘Mary! You have done something terrible! 28Sisterb of Aaron! Your
father was not an evil man; your mother was not unchaste!’ 29She
pointed at him. They said, ‘How can we converse with an infant?’c
30[But] he said: ‘I am a servant of God. He has granted me the
Scripture; made me a prophet; 31made me blessed wherever I may
be. He commanded me to pray, to give alms as long as I live, 32to
cherish my mother. He did not make me domineering or graceless.
33Peace was on me the day I was born, and will be on me the day I
die and the day I am raised to life again.’ 34Such was Jesus, son
of Mary.
[This is] a statement of the Truth about which they are in doubt:
35it would not be ﬁt God to have a child. He is far above that: when
He decrees something, He says only, ‘Be,’ and it is. 36‘God is my
Lord and your Lord, so serve Him: that is a straight path.’d37But
aSawm  can mean ‘abstinence’ from food or from speech.
bEither she had a brother called Aaron, or was simply of Aaron’s tribe: in Arabic
‘sister/brother of’ can mean ‘relation of’, e.g. ‘brother of Hamdan’ meaning ‘of the tribe of
Hamdan’.
cSee note to 3:46. Here again the term mahd  refers to any level place rather than the
concrete ‘cradle’.
dSome suggest that Muhammad is ordered to make this statement; others that it is
Jesus speaking.The Qur ᾿an 19:17 192factions have di ﬀered among themselves. What su ﬀering will come
to those who obscure the truth when a dreadful Day arrives! 38How
sharp of hearing, how sharp of sight they will be when they cometo Us, although now they are clearly o ﬀ course! Warn them
[Muhammad] of the Day of Remorse when the matter will bedecided, 39for they are heedless and do not believe. 40It is We
who will inherit the earth and all who are on it: they will all be
returned to Us.
41Mention too, in the Qur ᾿an, the story of Abraham. He was a
man of truth, a prophet. 42He said to his father, ‘Father, why do you
worship something that can neither hear nor see nor bene ﬁt you in
any way? 43Father, knowledge that has not reached you has come to
me, so follow me: I will guide you to an even path. 44Father, do not
worship Satan– – Satan has rebelled against the Lord of Mercy.
45Father, I fear that a punishment from the Lord of Mercy may a ﬄict
you and that you may become Satan’s companion [in Hell].’
a46His
father answered, ‘Abraham, do you reject my gods? I will stone youif you do not stop this. Keep out of my way!’ 47Abraham said, ‘Peace
be with you: I will beg my Lord to forgive you– – He is always gra-
cious to me– –48but for now I will leave you, and the idols you all pray
to, and I will pray to my Lord and trust that my prayer will not be invain.’ 49When he left his people and those they served beside God,
We granted him Isaac and Jacob and made them both prophets:50We granted Our grace to all of them, and gave them a noble
reputation.
51Mention too, in the Qur ᾿an, the story of Moses. He was
specially chosen, a messenger and a prophet: 52We called to him from
the right-hand side of the mountain and brought him close to Us insecret communion; 53out of Our grace We granted him his brother
Aaron as a prophet. 54Mention too, in the Qur ᾿an, the story of
Ishmael. He was true to his promise, a messenger and a prophet.
55He commanded his household to pray and give alms, and his Lord
was well pleased with him. 56Mention too, in the Qur ᾿an, the story of
Idris. He was a man of truth, a prophet. 57We raised him to a high
position.
58These were the prophets God blessed– – from the seed of Adam,
of those We carried in the Ark with Noah, from the seed of Abraham
aOr ‘that you will be a supporter of Satan’.Mary 193 19:58and Israel– – and those We guided and chose. When the revelations of
the Lord of Mercy were recited to them, they fell to their knees andwept, 59but there came after them generations who neglected prayer
and were driven by their own desires. These will come face to facewith their evil, 60but those who repent, who believe, who do right-
eous deeds, will enter Paradise. They will not be wronged in theleast: 61they will enter the Gardens of Lasting Bliss, promised by the
Lord of Mercy to His servants– – it is not yet seen but truly His
promise will be ful ﬁlled. 62There they will hear only peaceful talk,
nothing bad; there they will be given provision morning and evening.
63That is the Garden We shall give as their own to those of Our
servants who were devout.
64[Gabriel said],
a‘We only descend [with revelation] at your
Lord’s command– –everything before us, everything behind us,everything in between, all belongs to Him– –your Lord is never for-getful. 65He is Lord of the heavens and earth and everything in
between so worship Him: be steadfast in worshipping Him. Do youknow of anyone equal to Him?’
66Man says, ‘What? Once I am dead, will I be brought back to
life?’ 67but does man not remember that We created him when he
was nothing before? 68By your Lord [Prophet] We shall gather them
and the devils together and set them on their knees around Hell;
69We shall seize out of each group those who were most disobedient
towards the Lord of Mercy– –70We know best who most deserves to
burn in Hell– –71but every single one of you
b will approach it, a
decree from your Lord which must be ful ﬁlled. 72We shall save the
devout and leave the evildoers there on their knees.
73When Our revelations are recited to them in all their clarity, [all
that] the disbelievers say to the believers [is], ‘Which side is bettersituated? Which side has the better following?’ 74We have destroyed
many a generation before them who surpassed them in riches andoutward glitter! 75Say [Prophet], ‘The Lord of Mercy lengthens [the
lives] of the misguided, until, when they are confronted with whatthey have been warned about– – either the punishment [in this life] or
the Hour [of Judgement]– – they realize who is worse situated and
aThis is a response from Gabriel to the Prophet’s request for more frequent visits
(see Bukhari, Sahih , Book of Tafsir, Sura 19).
bThis is taken to refer either to the disbelievers mentioned here, or to all humanity.The Qur ᾿an 19:59 194who has the weakest forces.’ 76But God gives more guidance to those
who are guided, and good deeds of lasting merit are best and mostrewarding in your Lord’s sight. 77Have you considered the man who
rejects Our revelation, who says, ‘I will certainly be given wealth andchildren’? 78Has he penetrated the unknown or received a pledge to
that e ﬀect from the Lord of Mercy? 79No! We shall certainly record
what he says and prolong his punishment: 80We shall inherit from
him all that he speaks of and he will come to Us all alone.
81They have taken other gods beside God to give them strength,
82but these gods will reject their worship and will even turn against
them. 83Have you [Prophet] not seen how We send devils to incite
the disbelievers to sin? 84There is no need for you to be impatient
concerning them: We are counting down their [allotted] time. 85On
the Day We gather the righteous as an honoured company before theLord of Mercy 86and drive the sinful like a thirsty herd into Hell,
87no one will have power to intercede except for those who have
permission
a from the Lord of Mercy.
88The disbelievers say, ‘The Lord of Mercy has o ﬀspring.’b89How
terrible is this thing you assert: 90it almost causes the heavens to be
torn apart, the earth to split asunder, the mountains to crumble topieces, 91that they attribute o ﬀspring to the Lord of Mercy. 92It does
not be ﬁt the Lord of Mercy [to have o ﬀspring]: 93there is no
one in the heavens or earth who will not come to the Lord ofMercy as a servant– –94He has counted them all: He has numbered
them exactly– –95and they will each return to Him on the Day of
Resurrection all alone.
96But the Lord of Mercy will give love to those who believe and do
righteous deeds: 97We have made it
c easy, in your own language
[Prophet], so that you may bring glad news to the righteous andwarnings to a stubborn people. 98How many generations We have
destroyed before them! Do you perceive a single one of them now, or
hear as much as a whisper?
aFor the meaning of ῾ahdas idhn ‘permission’ see Baydawi. Cf. 10:3;78:38.
bMany translators say ‘a son’ here, not realizing that walad  in classical Arabic means
‘child’ or ‘children’. The discussion here is about the pagans of Mecca, who said thatthe angels were daughters of God.
cEither what is said in this sura or the whole Qur ᾿an.Mary 195 19:9820. TA HA
A Meccan sura that both begins and ends with mention of the Qur ᾿an: it was
not sent to the Prophet to cause him grief but is a clear proof from his Lord.The example of Moses is given as a lengthy account in order to encouragethe Prophet and show the end of the disbelievers. The destruction of earliergenerations is cited as a lesson from which the disbelievers should learn. TheProphet is ordered to be patient and to persevere with his worship.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Ta Haa
2It was not to distress you [Prophet] that We sent down the Qur ᾿an to
you, 3but as a reminder for those who hold God in awe, 4a revelation
from the One who created the earth and the high heaven, 5the Lord
of Mercy, established on the throne. 6Everything in the heavens and
on earth, everything between them, everything beneath the soil,
belongs to Him. 7Whatever you may say aloud, He knows what you
keep secret and what is even more hidden. 8God– –there is no god
but Him– –the most excellent names belong to Him.
9Has the story of Moses come to you [Prophet]?b10He saw a ﬁre
and said to his people, ‘Stay here– –I can see a ﬁre. Maybe I can bring
you a ﬂaming brand from it or ﬁnd some guidance there.’ 11When he
came to the ﬁre, he was summoned, ‘Moses! 12I am your Lord. Take
oﬀ your shoes: you are in the sacred valley of Tuwa. 13I have
chosen you, so listen to what is being revealed. 14I am God; there is
no god but Me. So worship Me and keep up the prayer so that youremember Me. 15The Hour is coming– –though I choose
c to keep it
hidden– –for each soul to be rewarded for its labour. 16Do not let
anyone who does not believe in it and follows his own desires distractyou from it, and so bring you to ruin.’
aThere is an opinion that ta ha  are not isolated letters but ‘O man!’ in the Yemeni
dialect of ῾Akk (Razi). For the signi ﬁcance of the isolated letters as a whole, see note to 2:
1.
bThis construction is an idiom in Arabic implying ‘think well about it’ or ‘take a
lesson from this’.
cAbu Muslim interprets akadu  as uridu , ‘I wish’ or ‘I choose’ (Razi).17‘Moses, what is that in your right hand?’ 18‘It is my sta ﬀ,’ he
said, ‘I lean on it; restrain my sheep with it;a I also have other uses
for it.’ 19God said, ‘Throw it down, Moses.’ 20He threw it down
and–– lo and behold!– – it became a fast-moving snake. 21He said,
‘Pick it up without fear: We shall turn it back into its former state.22Now place your hand under your armpit and it will come out white,
though unharmed: that is another sign. 23We do this to show you
some of Our greatest signs. 24Go to Pharaoh, for he has truly become
a tyrant.’ 25Moses said, ‘Lord, lift up my heart 26and ease my task for
me. 27Untie my tongue, 28so that they may understand my words,
29and give me a helper from my family, 30my brother Aaron– –
31augment my strength through him. 32Let him share my task 33so
that we can glorify You much 34and remember You often: 35You are
always watching over us.’
36God said, ‘Moses, your request is granted. 37Indeed We showed
you favour before. 38We inspired your mother, saying, 39“Put your
child into the chest, then place him in the river. Let the river washhim on to its bank, and he will be taken in by an enemy of Mine andhis.” I showered you with My love and planned that you should bereared under My watchful eye. 40Your sister went out, saying, “I will
tell you someone who will nurse him,” then We returned you to yourmother so that she could rejoice and not grieve. Later you killed aman, but We saved you from distress and tried you with other tests.You stayed among the people of Midian for years, then you camehere as I ordained. 41I have chosen you for Myself. 42Go, you and
your brother, with My signs, and make sure that you remember Me.43Go, both of you, to Pharaoh, for he has exceeded all bounds.
44Speak to him gently so that he may take heed, or show respect.’
45They said, ‘Lord, we fear he will do us great harm or exceed all
bounds.’ 46He said, ‘Do not be afraid, I am with you both, hearing
and seeing everything. 47Go and tell him, “We are your Lord’s mes-
sengers, so send the Children of Israel with us and do not oppressthem. We have brought you a sign from your Lord. Peace be uponwhoever follows the right guidance; 48it has been revealed to us that
punishment falls on whoever rejects the truth and turns his back onit.”’
49[Pharaoh] said, ‘Moses, who is this Lord of yours?’ 50Moses
aOr ‘beat down leaves for my sheep with it’.197 20:50 Ta Hasaid, ‘Our Lord is He who gave everything its form, then gave it
guidance.’ 51He said, ‘What about former generations?’ 52Moses
said, ‘My Lord alone has knowledge of them, all in a record; myLord does not err or forget.’ 53It was He who spread out the earth for
you and traced routes in it. He sent down water from the sky. Withthat water We bring forth every kind of plant, 54so eat, and graze
your cattle. There are truly signs in all this for people of understand-
ing. 55From the earth We created you, into it We shall return you,
and from it We shall raise you a second time.
56We showed Pharaoh all Our signs, but he denied them and
refused [to change]. 57He said, ‘Have you come to drive us from
our land with your sorcery, Moses? 58We will confront you with
sorcery to match your own: make an appointment between us which
neither of us will fail to keep, in a mutually agreeable place.’ 59He
said, ‘Your meeting will be on the day of the feast, so let the peoplebe assembled when the sun has risen high.’
60Pharaoh withdrew and gathered his resources,
a then he
returned. 61Moses said to them, ‘Beware, do not invent lies against
God or He will destroy you with His punishment. Whoever inventslies will fail.’ 62So they discussed their plan among themselves, talk-
ing secretly, 63saying, ‘These two men are sorcerers. Their purpose is
to drive you out of your land with their sorcery and put an end toyour time-honoured way of life. 64So gather your resources and line
up for the contest. Whoever wins today is sure to prosper.’ 65They
said, ‘Moses, will you throw ﬁrst or shall we?’ 66‘You throw,’ said
Moses, and– –lo and behold!– –through their sorcery, their ropes andstaﬀs seemed to him to be moving. 67Moses was inwardly alarmed,
68but We said, ‘Do not be afraid, you have the upper hand. 69Throw
down what is in your right hand: it will swallow up what they haveproduced. They have only produced the tricks of a sorcerer, and asorcerer will not prosper, wherever he goes.’
70[So it was, and] the sorcerers threw themselves down in sub-
mission. ‘We believe,’ they said, ‘in the Lord of Aaron and Moses.’
71Pharaoh said, ‘How dare you believe in him before I have given you
permission? This must be your master, the man who taught youwitchcraft. I shall certainly cut o ﬀ your alternate hands and feet,
b
aLiterally ‘his mischief’, kaydahu . This could refer to his sorcerers or to the plots he
made.
bSee note to 5:33.20:51 198 The Qur ᾿anthen crucify you on the trunks of palm trees. You will know for
certain which of us has the ﬁercer and more lasting punishment.’
72They said, ‘We shall never prefer you to the clear sign that has
come to us, nor to Him who created us. So decide whatever you will:you can only decide matters of this present life– –73we believe in our
Lord, [hoping] He may forgive us our sins and the sorcery that youforced us to practise– – God is better and more lasting.’
74Hell will be the reward of those who return to their Lord as
evildoers: there they will stay, neither living nor dying. 75But those
who return to their Lord as believers with righteous deeds will be
rewarded with the highest of ranks, 76Gardens of lasting bliss graced
with ﬂowing streams, and there they will stay. Such is the reward of
those who purify themselves.
77We revealed to Moses, ‘Go out at night with My servants and
strike a dry path for them across the sea.
a Have no fear of being
overtaken and do not be dismayed.’ 78Pharaoh pursued them with
his armies and was overwhelmed by the sea. 79Pharaoh truly led his
people astray; he did not guide them.
80Children of Israel, We rescued you from your enemies. We made
a pledge with you on the right-hand side of the mountain. We sentdown manna and quails for you, 81‘Eat from the good things We have
provided for you, but do not overstep the bounds, or My wrath willdescend on you. Anyone on whom My wrath descends has trulyfallen. 82Yet I am most forgiving towards those who repent, believe,
do righteous deeds, and stay on the right path.’
83[God said], ‘Moses, what has made you come ahead of your
people in such haste?’
b84and he said, ‘They are following in my
footsteps. I rushed to You, Lord, to please You,’ 85but God said, ‘We
have tested your people in your absence: the Samiric has led them
astray.’ 86Moses returned to his people, angry and aggrieved. He
said, ‘My people, did your Lord not make you a gracious promise?Was my absence too long for you? Did you want anger to fall on
you from your Lord and so broke your word to me?’ 87They said,
‘We did not break our word to you deliberately. We were burdenedwith the weight of people’s jewellery, so we threw it [into the ﬁre],
aBahr , ‘sea’, means any expanse of water, fresh or salty. Cf. 35:12.
bMoses had left his people in the charge of Aaron to contemplate on Mount Sinai.
See7:142 ﬀ .
cRazi suggests various unsubstantiated identities for the Samiri.199 20:87 Ta Haand the Samiri did the same,’ 88but he [used the molten jewellery to]
produce an image of a calf which made a lowing sound, and theysaid, ‘This is your god and Moses’ god, but he has forgotten.’ 89Did
they not see that [the calf] gave them no answer, that it had no powerto harm or bene ﬁt them? 90Aaron did say to them, ‘My people, this
calf is a test for you. Your true Lord is the Lord of Mercy, so followme and obey my orders,’ 91but they replied, ‘We shall not give up our
devotion to it until Moses returns to us.’
92Moses said, ‘When you realized they had gone astray, what pre-
vented you, Aaron, 93from coming after me? How could you disobey
my orders?’ 94He said, ‘Son of my mother– – let go of my beard and
my hair!– – I was afraid you would say, “You have caused division
among the children of Israel and have not heeded what I said.”’95Moses said, ‘And what was the matter with you, Samiri?’ 96He
replied, ‘I saw something they did not; I took in some of the teach-ings of the Messenger but tossed them aside:
a my soul prompted me
to do what I did.’ 97Moses said, ‘Get away from here! Your lot in this
life is to say, “Do not touch me,”b but you have an appointment from
which there is no escape. Look at your god which you have kept onworshipping– – we shall grind it down
c and scatter it into the sea.
98[People], your true god is the One God– – there is no god but
Him– – whose knowledge embraces everything.’
99In this way We relate to you [Prophet] stories of what happened
before. We have given you a Qur ᾿an from Us. 100Whoever turns away
from it will bear on the Day of Resurrection a heavy burden 101and
will remain under it. What a terrible burden to carry on that Day!
102When the trumpet is sounded and We gather the sinful, sightless,d
103they will murmur to one another, ‘You stayed only ten days [on
earth]’– –104We know best what they say– – but the more perceptive of
them will say, ‘Your stay [on earth] was only a single day.’
105They ask you [Prophet] about the mountains: say, ‘[On that
Day] my Lord will blast them into dust 106and leave a ﬂat plain,
107with no peak or trough to be seen. 108On that Day, people will
follow the summoner from whom there is no escape; every voice willbe hushed for the Lord of Mercy; only whispers will be heard. 109On
aLiterally ‘I took a handful from the trail of the messenger and ﬂung it . . .’.
bAnother interpretation is that the Samiri will become a social outcast.
cHarraqa  in classical usage has the meaning ‘grind’, as used here, rather than ‘burn’.
dZurq  from azraq , which means, among other things, ‘blind’. Cf. verses 124–6.20:88 200 The Qur ᾿anthat Day, intercession will be useless except from those to whom
the Lord of Mercy has granted permission and whose words Heapproves– –110He knows what is before and behind them, though
they do not comprehend Him– –111and [all] faces
a will be humbled
before the Living, Ever Watchful One. Those burdened with evildeeds will despair, 112but whoever has done righteous deeds and
believed need have no fear of injustice or deprivation.’ 113We have
sent the Qur ᾿an down in the Arabic tongue and given all kinds of
warnings in it, so that they may beware or take heed– –114exalted be
God, the one who is truly in control.
[Prophet], do not rush to recite before the revelation is fully
complete
b but say, ‘Lord, increase me in knowledge!’ 115We also
commanded Adam before you, but he forgot and We found him
lacking in constancy. 116When We said to the angels, ‘Bow down
before Adam,’ they did. But Iblis refused, 117so We said, ‘Adam, this
is your enemy, yours and your wife’s: do not let him drive you out ofthe garden and make you miserable. 118In the garden you will never
go hungry, feel naked, 119be thirsty, or su ﬀer the heat of the sun.’
120But Satan whispered to Adam, saying, ‘Adam, shall I show you
the tree of immortality and power that never decays?’ 121and they
both ate from it. They became conscious of their nakedness and
began to cover themselves with leaves from the garden. Adam dis-
obeyed his Lord and was led astray– –122later his Lord brought him
close, accepted his repentance, and guided him– –123God said, ‘Get
out of the garden as each other’s enemy.’
c
Whoever follows My guidance, when it comes to you [people],
will not go astray nor fall into misery, 124but whoever turns away
from it will have a life of great hardship. We shall bring him blind tothe Assembly on the Day of Resurrection 125and he will say, ‘Lord,
why did You bring me here blind? I was sighted before!’ 126God will
say, ‘This is how it is: You ignored Our revelations when they cameto you, so today you will be ignored.’ 127This is how We reward those
who go too far, and who do not believe in their Lord’s revelations.The greatest and most enduring punishment is in the Hereafter.
aThis can also mean ‘their faces’.
bMuhammad, when repeating to Gabriel each revelation, after the angel delivered it,
sometimes in his eagerness started repeating even before Gabriel had ﬁnished revealing.
See also 75:16–19.
cBoth parties, cf. 2:36 and note.201 20:127 Ta Ha128Do they not draw a lesson from the many generations We
destroyed before them, through whose dwelling places they nowwalk? There truly are signs in this for anyone with understanding!
129If it were not for a preordained Word from your Lord [Prophet],
they would already have been destroyed. Their time has been set,130so [Prophet] be patient with what they say– – celebrate the praise
of your Lord, before the rising and setting of the sun, celebrate His
praise during the night, and at the beginning and end of the day, so
that you may ﬁnd contentment– –131and do not gaze longingly at
what We have given some of them to enjoy, the ﬁnery of this present
life: We test them through this, but the provision of your Lord isbetter and more lasting. 132Order your people
a to pray, and pray
steadfastly yourself. We are not asking you to give Us provision;b
We provide for you, and the rewards of the Hereafter belong to thedevout.
133The disbelievers say, ‘Why does he not bring us a sign from his
Lord?’ Have they not been given clear proof con ﬁrming what was
in the earlier scriptures? 134If We had destroyed them through
punishment before this Messenger came, they would have said,‘Lord, if only You had sent us a messenger, we could have followed
Your revelations before we su ﬀered humiliation and disgrace!’
135[Prophet], say, ‘We are all waiting, so you carry on waiting: you
will come to learn who has followed the even path, and been rightlyguided.’
aOr ‘your family’.bCf. 51:57.20:128 202 The Qur ᾿an21. THE PROPHETS
A Meccan sura which takes its name from the list of prophets mentioned from verse
48 to verse 91. It stresses that fact that Muhammad is a man like earlier prophets,
and has been given the same message to declare the unity of God. It warns thedisbelievers of the approaching Judgement from which there is no escape.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Ever closer to people draws their reckoning, while they turn away,
heedless. 2Whenever any fresh revelation comes to them from their
Lord, they listen to it playfully 3with frivolous hearts. The evildoers
conferred in secret: ‘Is this man anything but a mortal like your-selves? Are you going to fall under his spell with your eyes wideopen?’ 4He said,
a ‘My Lord knows everything that is said in the
heavens and the earth: He is the All Hearing, the All Knowing.’5Some say, ‘Muddled dreams’; others, ‘He made it up’; yet others,
‘He is just a poet, let him show us a sign as previous messengersdid.’ 6But of the communities We destroyed before them not a single
one believed. Will these now believe? 7And even before your time
[Prophet], all the messengers We sent were only men We inspired– –if you [disbelievers] do not know, ask people who know the Scrip-ture– – 8We did not give them bodies that ate no food, nor were they
immortal. 9We ful ﬁlled Our promise to them in the end: We saved
them and those We wished to save, and We destroyed those whoexceeded all bounds.
10And now We have sent down to you [people] a Scripture to
remind you. Will you not use your reason? 11How many com-
munities of evildoers We have destroyed! How many others Wehave raised up in their places! 12When they felt Our might coming
upon them, see how they tried to escape it! 13‘Do not try to escape.
Go back to your homes and the pleasure you revelled in: you
may be questioned.’ 14They said, ‘Woe to us! We were wrong!’
15and that cry of theirs did not cease until We made them burnt-o ﬀ
stubble.
aHere and in verse 112 an alternative reading is the imperative, qul (‘say’).16We did not create the heavens and the earth and everything
between them playfully. 17If We had wished for a pastime, We could
have found it within Us– – if We had wished for any such thing. 18No!
We hurl the truth against falsehood, and truth obliterates it– – see
how falsehood vanishes away! Woe to you [people] for the way youdescribe God! 19Everyone in the heavens and earth belongs to Him,
and those that are with Him are never too proud to worship Him,
nor do they grow weary; 20they glorify Him tirelessly night and day.
21Have they chosen any gods from the earth who can give life to
the dead? 22If there had been in the heavens or earth any gods but
Him, both heavens and earth would be in ruins: God, Lord of theThrone, is far above the things they say: 23He cannot be called to
account for anything He does, whereas they will be called to account.24Have they chosen to worship other gods instead of Him? Say,
‘Bring your proof. This is the Scripture for those who are with meand the Scripture for those who went before me.’ But most of themdo not recognize the truth, so they pay no heed. 25We never sent any
messenger before you [Muhammad] without revealing to him:‘There is no god but Me, so serve Me.’ 26And they say, ‘The Lord of
Mercy has taken o ﬀspring for Himself.’
a May He be exalted! No!
They are only His honoured servants: 27they do not speak before He
speaks and they act by His command. 28He knows what is before
them and what is behind them, and they cannot intercede withoutHis permission
b– –indeed they themselves stand in awe of Him. 29If
any of them were to claim, ‘I am a god beside Him,’ We wouldreward them with Hell: this is how We reward evildoers.
30Are the disbelievers not aware that the heavens and the earth
used to be joined together and that We ripped them apart, that Wemade every living thing from water? Will they not believe? 31And
We put ﬁrm mountains on the earth, lest it should sway under them,
and set broad paths on it, so that they might follow the right direc-tion, 32and We made the sky a well-secured canopy– – yet from its
wonders they turn away. 33It is He who created night and day,
the sun and the moon, each ﬂoating in its orbit. 34We have not
granted everlasting life to any other human being before you either[Muhammad]– – if you die, will [the disbelievers] live for ever?
aThe Meccan polytheists claimed the angels were God’s daughters.
bSee20:109.The Qur ᾿an 21:16 20435Every soul is certain to taste death: We test you all through the bad
and the good, and to Us you will all return. 36When the disbelievers
see you, they laugh at you: ‘Is this the one who talks about yourgods?’ They reject any talk of the Lord of Mercy.
37Man was created hasty: I will show you My signs soon, so do not
ask Me to hasten them. 38They say, ‘When will this promise be
fulﬁlled, if what you say is true?’ 39If the disbelievers only knew, the
time will arrive when they will not be able to ward o ﬀ the Fire from
their faces or their backs, and they will get no help. 40It will come
upon them suddenly and stupefy them; they will be powerless to
push it away; they will not be reprieved.
41Messengers before you [Muhammad] were also ridiculed, but
those who mocked them were overwhelmed in the end by the very
thing they had mocked. 42Say, ‘Who could protect you night and day
from the Lord of Mercy?’ Yet they turn away when their Lord ismentioned. 43Do they have gods who can defend them against Us?
Their gods have no power to help themselves, nor can they be pro-tected from Us. 44We have allowed these sinners and their fore-
fathers to enjoy life for a long time. But do they not see how We areshrinking their borders? Is it they who will prevail? 45Say, ‘I warn
you only through the Revelation.’ The deaf will not hear the warning
call, 46yet if a mere breath of your Lord’s punishment touches
them, they will be sure to cry, ‘Woe to us! We were wrong!’ 47We
will set up scales of justice for the Day of Resurrection so that noone can be wronged in the least, and if there should be even theweight of a mustard seed, We shall bring it out– – We take excellent
account.
48We gave Moses and Aaron [the Scripture] that distinguishes
right from wrong, a light and a reminder for those who are mindfulof God, 49those who stand in awe of their Lord, though He is
unseen, and who fear the Hour. 50This [Qur ᾿an] too is a blessed
message We have sent down– – are you [people] going to deny it?
51Long ago We bestowed right judgement on Abraham and We knew
him well. 52He said to his father and his people, ‘What are these
images to which you are so devoted?’ 53They replied, ‘We found our
fathers worshipping them.’ 54He said, ‘You and your fathers have
clearly gone astray.’ 55They asked, ‘Have you brought us the truth or
are you just playing about?’ 56He said, ‘Listen! Your true Lord is the
Lord of the heavens and the earth, He who created them, and I am aThe Prophets
205 21:56witness to this. 57By God I shall certainly plot against your idols as
soon as you have turned your backs!’ 58He broke them all into pieces,
but left the biggest one for them to return to. 59They said, ‘Who has
done this to our gods? How wicked he must be!’ 60Some said, ‘We
heard a youth called Abraham talking about them.’ 61They said,
‘Bring him before the eyes of the people, so that they may witness[his trial].’ 62They asked, ‘Was it you, Abraham, who did this to our
gods?’ 63He said, ‘No, it was done by the biggest of them– – this one.
Ask them, if they can talk.’ 64They turned to one another, saying, ‘It
is you who are in the wrong,’ 65but then they lapsed again and said,
‘You know very well these gods cannot speak.’ 66Abraham said, ‘How
can you worship what can neither bene ﬁt nor harm you, instead of
God? 67Shame on you and on the things you worship instead of God.
Have you no sense?’ 68They said, ‘Burn him and avenge your gods, if
you are going to do the right thing.’ 69But We said, ‘Fire, be cool and
safe for Abraham.’ 70They planned to harm him, but We made them
suﬀer the greatest loss. 71We saved him and Lot [and sent them] to
the land We blessed for all people, 72and We gave him Isaac and Jacob
as an additional gift, and made each of them righteous. 73We made all
of them leaders, guiding others by Our command, and We inspiredthem to do good works, to keep up the prayer, and to give alms: theywere Our true worshippers. 74We gave Lot sound judgement and
knowledge and saved him from the community who practisedobscenities– – they were shameless people who broke God’s law! 75We
admitted him to Our mercy; he was a righteous man.
76Long before that, We answered Noah when he cried out to Us:
We saved him and his family from the great calamity 77and We
helped him against the people who rejected Our signs– – they were
evil people, so We drowned them all.
78And remember David and Solomon, when they gave judgement
regarding the ﬁeld into which sheep strayed by night and grazed. We
witnessed their judgement 79and made Solomon understand the case
[better], though We gave sound judgement and knowledge to both ofthem. We made the mountains and the birds celebrate Our praises
with David– – We did all these things– –80We taught him how to make
coats of mail for the bene ﬁt of you [people], to protect you in your
wars, but are you grateful for this? 81We harnessed the stormy wind
for Solomon, so that it sped by his command to the land We hadblessed– – We have knowledge of all things– –82and We made some ofThe Qur ᾿an 21:57 206the jinna subservient to him, to dive for him and do other works
besides. We were watching over them.
83Remember Job, when he cried to his Lord, ‘Su ﬀering has truly
aﬄicted me, but you are the Most Merciful of the merciful.’ 84We
answered him, removed his su ﬀering, and restored his family to him,
along with more like them, as an act of grace from Us and a reminderfor all who serve Us. 85And remember Ishmael, Idris, and Dhu’l-
Kiﬂ:
b they were all steadfast. 86We admitted them to Our mercy;
they were truly righteous. 87And remember the man with the whale,c
when he went o ﬀ angrily, thinking We could not restrict him,
but then he cried out in the deep darkness, ‘There is no God butYou, glory be to You, I was wrong.’ 88We answered him and saved
him from distress: this is how We save the faithful. 89Remember
Zachariah, when he cried to his Lord, ‘My Lord, do not leave mechildless, though You are the best of heirs.’ 90We answered him– –W e
gave him John, and cured his wife of barrenness– – they were always
keen to do good deeds. They called upon Us out of longing and awe,
and humbled themselves before Us. 91Remember the one who
guarded her chastity.
d We breathed into her from Our Spirit and
made her and her son a sign for all people.
92[Messengers],e this community of yours is one single community
and I am your Lord, so serve Me. 93They have torn their unity apart,
but they will all return to Us. 94If anyone does good deeds and is
a believer, his e ﬀorts will not be ignored: We record them for
him. 95No community destroyed by Us can escape its return,f96and
when the peoples of Gog and Magog are let loose and swarm swiftlyfrom every highland, 97when the True Promise draws near, the
disbelievers’ eyes will stare in terror, and they will say, ‘Woe to us!We were not aware of this at all. We were wrong.’ 98You [dis-
believers] and what you worship instead of God will be fuel forHell: that is where you will go– –99if these [idols] had been real gods
they would not have gone there– – you will all stay there. 100There
aCf. 34:12–13.
bSome commentators suggest this refers to the prophet Ezekiel. See Encyclopaedia
of Islam  under Dhu’l-Ki ﬂ.
cJonah. Cf. 37:139–48.
dMary. Cf. 66:12.
eCf. 23:51–3.
fOther interpretations are: ‘they will not return to the world’; ‘they will not turn
away from their misdeeds’.The Prophets 207 21:100the disbelievers will be groaning piteously, but the [idols] will hear
nothing.
101But those for whom We have decreed Paradise will be kept far
from Hell– –102they will not hear a murmur from it– – and endlessly
they will enjoy everything their souls desire. 103They will have no
fear of the great Terror:a the angels will receive them with the
words, ‘This is the Day you were promised!’ 104On that Day, We shall
roll up the skies as a writer rolls up [his] scrolls. We shall reproducecreation just as We produced it the ﬁrst time: this is Our binding
promise. We shall certainly do all these things.
105We wrote in the Psalms, as We did in [earlier] Scripture: ‘My
righteous servants will inherit the earth.’ 106There truly is a message
in this for the servants of God! 107It was only as a mercy that We sent
you [Prophet] to all people.
b108Say, ‘What is revealed to me is that
your God is one God– – will you submit to Him?’ 109But if they turn
away, say, ‘I have proclaimed the message fairly to you all. I do notknow whether the judgement you are promised is near or far, 110but
He knows what you reveal and conceal. 111I do not know: this [time]
may well be a test for you, and enjoyment for a while.’ 112He said,
c
‘My Lord, pass the true judgement.’ And, ‘Our Lord is the Lord of
Mercy. We seek His assistance against what you [disbelievers] say.’
aThe Day of Judgement.
bOr ‘We sent you [Prophet] only as a mercy to all people’.
cSee note to verse 4.The Qur ᾿an 21:101 20822. THE PILGRIMAGE
A Medinan sura that gets its title from the reference to the sacred rite of the
pilgrimage ﬁrst enacted by Abraham (verse 27). This theme is introduced by the
condemnation of those who bar the believers from access to the Sacred Mosqueand is followed by permission to ﬁght when attacked. The sura begins with the
Day of Judgement and castigates those who worship useless idols, describingthem later as powerless to create even a ﬂy. The sura ends by urging the
Muslims to persevere in following the faith of Abraham.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1People, be mindful of your Lord, for the earthquake of the Last
Hour will be a mighty thing: 2on the Day you see it, every nursing
mother will think no more of her baby, every pregnant female willmiscarry, you will think people are drunk when they are not, sosevere will be God’s torment. 3Yet still there are some who, with no
knowledge, argue about God, who follow every devilish rebel 4fated
to lead astray those who take his side, and guide them to the su ﬀering
of the blazing ﬂame.
5People, [remember,] if you doubt the Resurrection, that We
created you from dust, then a drop of ﬂuid, then a clinging form,
then a lump of ﬂesh, both shaped and unshaped: We mean to make
Our power clear to you. Whatever We choose We cause to remain inthe womb for an appointed time, then We bring you forth as infantsand then you grow and reach maturity. Some die young and someare left to live on to such an age that they forget all they once knew.You sometimes see the earth lifeless, yet when We send down water itstirs and swells and produces every kind of joyous growth: 6this is
because God is the Truth; He brings the dead back to life; He haspower over everything.
7There is no doubt that the Last Hour is bound to come, nor that
God will raise the dead from their graves, 8yet still there are some
who, with no knowledge or guidance or any book of enlightenment,argue about God, 9turning scornfully aside to lead others away from
God’s path. Disgrace in this world awaits such a person and, on the
Day of Resurrection, We shall make him taste the su ﬀering of theFire. 10[It will be said], ‘This is for what you have stored up with
your own hands: God is never unjust to His creatures.’
11There are also some who serve God with unsteady faith: if
something good comes their way, they are satis ﬁed, but if they
are tested, they revert to their old ways, losing both this worldand the next– – that is the clearest loss. 12 Instead of God, they call
upon what can neither harm nor help them– – that is straying far
away – –13or invoke one whose harm is closer than his help: an
evil master and an evil companion. 14But God will admit those
who believe and do good deeds to Gardens graced with ﬂowing
streams. God does whatever He wishes. 15Anyone who thinks that
God will not support him in this world and the next should stretcha rope up to the sky, climb all the way up it,
a and see whether
this strategy removes the cause of his anger. 16In this way, We send
the Qur ᾿an down as clear messages, and God guides whoever He
will.
17As for the believers, those who follow the Jewish faith, the
Sabians,b the Christians, the Magians,c and the idolaters, God will
judge between them on the Day of Resurrection; God witnesses allthings. 18Do you not realize [Prophet] that everything in the heavens
and earth submits
d to God: the sun, the moon, the stars, the moun-
tains, the trees, and the animals? So do many human beings, thoughfor many others punishment is well deserved. Anyone disgraced byGod will have no one to honour him: God does whatever He will.19These two kinds of people disagree about their Lord. Garments of
ﬁre will be tailored for those who disbelieve; scalding water will be
poured over their heads, 20melting their insides as well as their skins;
21there will be iron crooks to restrain them; 22whenever, in their
anguish, they try to escape, they will be pushed back in and told,
‘Taste the su ﬀering of the Fire.’ 23But God will admit those who
believe and do good deeds to Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams;
there they will be adorned with golden bracelets and pearls; there
they will have silken garments. 24They were guided to good speech
and to the path of the One Worthy of all Praise.
aSee also 6:35. Another interpretation of this verse is ‘stretch a rope up to the ceiling
and hang himself ’.
bSee note to 2:62.
cFollowers of an ancient Persian and Median religion, based on monotheism,
identi ﬁed with Zoroastrians.
dLiterally, prostrates.The Qur ᾿an 22:10 21025As for the disbelievers, who bar others from God’s path and
from the Sacred Mosque– – which We made for all people, residents
and visitors alike– – and who try to violate it with wrongdoing, We
shall make them taste a painful punishment. 26We showed Abraham
the site of the House, saying, ‘Do not assign partners to Me. PurifyMy House for those who circle around it, those who stand topray, and those who bow and prostrate themselves. 27Proclaim the
Pilgrimage to all people. They will come to you on foot and on everykind of swift mount, emerging from every deep mountain pass 28to
attain bene ﬁts and celebrate God’s name, on speci ﬁed days, over the
livestock He has provided for them– – feed yourselves and the poor
and unfortunate– –29so let the pilgrims perform their acts of cleans-
ing, ful ﬁl their vows, and circle around the Ancient House.’ 30All this
[is ordained by God]: anyone who honours the sacred ordinances ofGod will have good rewards from his Lord.
Livestock have been made lawful to you, except for what has been
explicitly forbidden. Shun the ﬁlth of idolatrous beliefs and practices
and shun false utterances.
a31Devote yourselves to God and assign
Him no partners, for the person who does so is like someone who hasbeen hurled down from the skies and snatched up by the birds orﬂung to a distant place by the wind. 32All this [is ordained by God]:
those who honour God’s rites show the piety of their hearts. 33Live-
stock are useful to you until the set time. Then their place of sacri ﬁce
is near the Ancient House: 34We appointed acts of devotion for every
community, for them to celebrate God’s name over the livestock Heprovided for them: your God is One, so devote yourselves to Him.[Prophet], give good news to the humble 35whose hearts ﬁll with awe
whenever God is mentioned, who endure whatever happens to themwith patience, who keep up the prayer, who give to others out of Ourprovision to them.
36We have made camels
b part of God’s sacred rites for you. There
is much good in them for you, so invoke God’s name over them asthey are lined up for sacri ﬁce, then, when they have fallen down
dead, feed yourselves and those who do not ask, as well as those whodo. We have subjected them to you in this way so that you may bethankful. 37It is neither their meat nor their blood that reaches God
aDedicating animals to idols.
bThe term budn  can refer to either camels or cows.The Pilgrimage 211 22:37but your piety. He has subjected them to you in this way so that you
may glorify God for having guided you.
Give good news to those who do good: 38God will defend the
believers; God does not love the unfaithful or the ungrateful.39Those who have been attacked are permitted to take up arms
because they have been wronged– – God has the power to help
them– –40those who have been driven unjustly from their homes only
for saying, ‘Our Lord is God.’ If God did not repel some people by
means of others, many monasteries, churches, synagogues, andmosques, where God’s name is much invoked, would have beendestroyed. God is sure to help those who help His cause– – God is
strong and mighty– –41those who, when We establish them in the
land, keep up the prayer, pay the prescribed alms, command whatis right, and forbid what is wrong: God controls the outcome ofall events.
42If they reject you [Prophet], so did the people of Noah before
them, and those of ῾Ad, Thamud, 43Abraham, Lot, 44Midian. Moses
too was called a liar. I gave the disbelievers time, but in the end Ipunished them. How I condemned them! 45How many towns
steeped in wrongdoing We have destroyed and left in total ruin; howmany deserted wells; how many lofty palaces! 46Have these people
[of Mecca] not travelled through the land with hearts to understandand ears to hear? It is not people’s eyes that are blind, but their heartswithin their breasts.
47They will challenge you [Prophet] to hasten the punishment.
God will not fail in His promise– – a Day with your Lord is like a
thousand years by your reckoning. 48To many a town steeped in
wrongdoing I gave more time and then struck them down: they allreturn to Me in the end.
49Say [Prophet], ‘People, I am sent only to give you clear warning.’
50Those who believe and do good deeds will be forgiven and have a
generous reward, 51but those who strive to oppose Our messages and
try in vain to defeat Us are destined for the Blaze. 52We have never
sent any messenger or prophet before you [Muhammad] into whose
wishes Satan did not insinuate something, but God removes
a what
Satan insinuates and then God a ﬃrms His message. God is all
aThe basic meaning of nasakha  is ‘removed’ rather than ‘abrogated’ ( al-Mu ῾jam
al-Wasit ).The Qur ᾿an 22:38 212knowing and wise: 53He makes Satan’s insinuations a temptation
only for the sick at heart and those whose hearts are hardened– – the
evildoers are profoundly opposed [to the Truth]– –54and He causes
those given knowledge to realize that this Revelation is yourLord’s Truth, so that they may believe in it and humble theirhearts to Him: God guides the faithful to the straight path. 55The
disbelievers will remain in doubt about it until the Hour suddenly
overpowers them or until torment descends on them on a Day
devoid of all hope. 56On that Day control will belong to God:
He will judge between them. Those who believe and do gooddeeds will be admitted to Gardens of Delight, 57while those who
disbelieve and reject Our revelations will receive a humiliatingtorment.
58He will give a generous provision to those who migrated in
God’s way and were killed or died. He is the Best Provider. 59He will
admit them to a place that will please them: God is all knowing andmost forbearing. 60So it will be. God will help those who retaliate
against an aggressive act merely with its like and are then wrongedagain: God is pardoning and most forgiving. 61So it will be, because
God makes night pass into day, and day into night, and He is allhearing and all seeing. 62So it will be, because it is God alone who is
the Truth, and whatever else they invoke is sheer falsehood: it is Godwho is the Most High, the Most Great.
63Have you [Prophet] not considered how God sends water down
from the sky and the next morning the earth becomes green? God istruly most subtle, all aware; 64everything in the heavens and earth
belongs to Him; God alone is self-su ﬃcient, worthy of all praise.
65Have you not considered how God has made everything on the
earth of service to you? That ships sail the sea at His command?That He keeps the heavens from falling down on the earth withoutHis permission? God is most compassionate and most merciful tomankind– –66it is He who gave you [people] life, will cause you to die,
then will give you life again– – but man is ungrateful.
67We have appointed acts of devotion for every community to
observe, so do not let them argue with you [Prophet] about this
matter. Call them to your Lord– – you are on the right path– –68and if
they argue with you, say, ‘God is well aware of what you are doing.’69On the Day of Resurrection, God will judge between you regard-
ing your di ﬀerences. 70Are you [Prophet] not aware that God knowsThe Pilgrimage
213 22:70all that is in the heavens and earth? All this is written in a Record;
this is easy for God.
71Yet beside God they serve that for which He has sent no author-
ity and of which they have no knowledge:a the evildoers will have no
one to help them. 72[Prophet], you can see the hostility on the faces
of the disbelievers when Our messages are recited clearly to them: itis almost as if they are going to attack those who recite Our messagesto them. Say, ‘Shall I tell you what is far worse than what you feelnow? The Fire that God has promised the disbelievers! What adismal end!’ 73People, here is an illustration, so listen carefully: those
you call on beside God could not, even if they combined all their
forces, create a ﬂy, and if a ﬂy took something away from them, they
would not be able to retrieve it. How feeble are the petitioners andhow feeble are those they petition! 74They have no grasp of God’s
true measure: God is truly most strong and mighty.
75God chooses messengers from among the angels and from
among men. God is all hearing, all seeing: 76He knows what lies
before and behind them. All matters return to Him. 77Believers, bow
down, prostrate yourselves, worship your Lord, and do good so thatyou may succeed. 78Strive hard for God as is His due: He has
chosen you and placed no hardship in your religion, the faith of yourforefather Abraham. God has called you Muslims
b– –both in the past
and in this [message]– –so that the Messenger can bear witness aboutyou and so that you can bear witness about other people. So keep upthe prayer, give the prescribed alms, and seek refuge in God: He isyour protector– –an excellent protector and an excellent helper.
ai.e. ‘scriptural knowledge’.bi.e. ‘devoted to God’.The Qur ᾿an 22:71 21423. THE BELIEVERS
A Meccan sura which stresses that the believers are the ones who will succeed,
whereas the disbelievers will be punished for their arrogance and derision.Several proofs are given of God’s Oneness and His power, and the inevitabilityof the Resurrection is emphasized.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1[How] prosperous are the believers! 2Those who pray humbly,
3who shun idle talk, 4who pay the prescribed alms, 5who guard their
chastity 6except with their spouses or their slavesa– –with these they
are not to blame, 7but anyone who seeks more than this is exceeding
the limits– – 8who are faithful to their trusts and pledges 9and who
keep up their prayers, 10will rightly be given 11Paradise as their
own,b there to remain.
12We created man from an essence of clay, 13then We placed him as
a drop of ﬂuid in a safe place, 14then We made that drop into a
clinging form, and We made that form into a lump of ﬂesh, and We
made that lump into bones, and We clothed those bones withﬂesh, and later We made him into other forms
c– –glory be to God,
the best of creators!– – 15then you will die 16and then, on the Day of
Resurrection, you will be raised up again.
17We created seven levelsd above you: We are never unmindful of
Our creation. 18We sent water down from the sky in due measure
and lodged it in the earth– –We have the power to take it all away ifWe so wish– – 19with it We produced for you gardens of date palms
and vines, with many fruits there for you to eat, 20and a tree, growing
out of Mount Sinai, that produces oil and seasoning for your food.21There is a lesson for you in livestock: We produce milk for you to
drink from their bellies. And they have many other bene ﬁts: you eat
them 22and you ride on them, as you do in ships.
aCf. 4:25.
bLiterally ‘will be the heirs to “inherit” Paradise’, but they do not inherit from
anyone who dies.
cRazi quotes Ibn ῾Abbas to explain ‘other forms’ as referring to all the various stages
of infancy, childhood, and maturity– –cf. 22:5;40:67.
dTara ᾿iq: ‘levels (of heaven)’ or ‘highways’ (Razi).23We sent Noah to his people. He said, ‘My people, serve God, for
He is your only god. Will you not heed Him?’ 24But the leading
disbelievers among his people said, ‘He is merely a mortal likeyou, trying to gain some superiority over you. God would havesent down angels if He had wished; besides, we never heard ofanything like this from our forefathers. 25He is just a madman, so
let’s wait and see what happens to him.’ 26Noah said, ‘My Lord, help
me! They call me a liar,’ 27and so We revealed to him: ‘Build the
Ark under Our watchful eye and according to Our revelation.
When Our command comes and water gushes up out of the earth,
a
take pairs of every species on board, and your family, except forthose on whom the sentence has already been passed– – do not plead
with me for the evildoers: they will be drowned– –28and when
you and your companions are settled on the Ark, say, “Praise be toGod, who delivered us from the wicked people,” 29and say, “My
Lord, let me land with Your blessing: it is You who provide the bestlandings”.’ 30There are signs in all this: We have always put [people]
to the test.
31Then We raised another generation after them, 32and sent one of
their own as a messenger: ‘Serve God, for He is your only god. Willyou not heed Him?’ 33But the leading disbelievers among his
people, who denied the Meeting in the Hereafter, to whom We hadgranted ease and plenty in this life, said, ‘He is just a mortal likeyou–– he eats what you eat and drinks what you drink– –34and you
will really be losers if you obey a mortal like yourselves. 35How can
he promise you that after you die and become dust and bones you
will be brought out alive? 36What you are promised is very far-
fetched. 37There is only the life of this world: we die, we live,
b but we
will never be resurrected. 38He is just a man making lies up about
God. We will never believe in him.’ 39The prophet said, ‘My Lord,
help me! They call me a liar,’ 40and so God said, ‘Soon they will be
ﬁlled with regret.’ 41The blast justly struck them and We swept them
away like scum. Away with the evildoers! 42We raised other gener-
ations after them– –43no community can advance or delay its time– –
44and We sent Our messengers in succession: whenever a messenger
came to a community they invariably called him a liar, so We
aLiterally ‘the furnace boils over’.
bRazi interprets this order to mean successive generations.The Qur ᾿an 23:23 216destroyed them one after the other and made them into cautionary
tales. Away with the disbelievers!
45Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron, with Our signs and
clear authority, 46to Pharaoh and his prominent leaders, but they
responded with arrogance: they were a haughty people. 47They said,
‘Are we to believe in two mortals like us? And their people are ourservants?’ 48and so they called them both liars: they became another
ruined people. 49We gave Moses the Scripture, so that they
a might
be rightly guided. 50We made the son of Mary and his mother a sign;
We gave them shelter on a peaceful hillside with ﬂowing water.b
51Messengers, eat good things and do good deeds: I am well aware
of what you do. 52This community of yours is one– – and I am your
Lord: be mindful of Me– –53but they have split their community into
sects, each rejoicing in their own. 54So [Muhammad] leave them for a
while steeped [in their ignorance]. 55Do they reckon that, by giving
them wealth and sons, 56We race to give them good things? They
really have no idea! 57Those who stand in awe of their Lord, 58who
believe in His messages, 59who do not ascribe partners to Him, 60who
always give with hearts that tremble at the thought that they mustreturn to Him, 61are the ones who race toward good things, and they
will be the ﬁrst to get them. 62We do not burden any soul with more
than it can bear– – We have a Record that tells the truth– – they will
not be wronged. 63But the disbelievers’ hearts are steeped [in ignor-
ance of ] all this; and there are other things besides this that theydo. 64When We bring Our punishment on those corrupted with
wealth, they will cry for help: 65‘Do not cry out today: you will get
no help from Us. 66Time and time again My messages were recited
to you, but you turned arrogantly on your heels, 67and spent the
evening making fun of [the Qur ᾿an].’
68Have they not contemplated the Word of God? Has something
come to them that did not come to their forefathers? 69Do they not
recognize their Messenger? So why do they reject him? 70Why do
they say he is possessed? He has brought them the truth and most ofthem hate it, 71but if the truth were in accordance with their desires,
the heavens, the earth, and everyone in them would disintegrate.
We have brought them their Reminder and they turn away from it.
a‘His people’– –Moses was given the Scripture later, so ‘they’ only refers to the
children of Israel.
bWhere Mary gave birth; see 19:22–6.The Believers 217 23:7172Do you [Prophet] ask them for any payment? Your Lord’s is the best
payment: He is the Best of Providers. 73You call them to a straight
path 74and those who do not believe in the Hereafter turn away from
that path. 75Even if We were to show them mercy and relieve them of
distress, they would blindly persist in their transgression. 76We have
already a ﬄicted them, yet they did not submit to their Lord: they
will not humble themselves 77until We open a gate to severe torment
for them– – then they will be plunged into utter despair.
78It is God who endowed you with hearing, sight, and hearts– –
how seldom you are grateful! 79It is He who made you multiply on
earth. It is to Him that you will be gathered: 80it is He who gives life
and death; the alternation of night and day depends on Him; will
you not use your minds? 81But, like others before them, 82they say,
‘What? When we die and turn to dust and bones, shall we really beresurrected? 83We have heard such promises before, and so did our
forefathers. These are just ancient fables.’ 84Say [Prophet], ‘Who
owns the earth and all who live in it, if you know [so much]?’ 85and
they will reply, ‘God.’ Say, ‘Will you not take heed?’ 86Say, ‘Who is
the Lord of the seven heavens? Who is the Lord of the MightyThrone?’ 87and they will reply, ‘God.’ Say, ‘Will you not be mindful?’
88Say, ‘Who holds control of everything in His hand? Who protects,
while there is no protection against Him, if you know [so much]?’
89and they will reply, ‘God.’ Say, ‘Then how can you be so deluded?’
90The fact is, We brought them the truth and they are lying. 91God
has never had a child. Nor is there any god beside Him– – if there
were, each god would have taken his creation aside and tried to over-come the others. May God be exalted above what they describe! 92He
knows what is not seen as well as what is seen; He is far above anypartner they claim for Him. 93Say, ‘Lord, if You are going to show me
the punishment You have promised them, 94then Lord, do not
include me among the evildoers!’ 95We certainly are able to show you
the punishment We have promised them. 96Repel evil with good– –
We are well aware of what they attribute to Us– –97and say, ‘Lord, I
take refuge with You from the goadings of the evil ones; 98I seek
refuge with you, Lord, so that they may not come near me.’
99When death comes to one of them, he cries, ‘My Lord, let me
return 100so as to make amends for the things I neglected.’ Never!
This will not go beyond his words: a barrier stands behind suchpeople until the very Day they are resurrected. 101On that Day whenThe Qur ᾿an 23:72 218the Trumpet is blown, the ties between them will be as nothing and
they will not ask about each other: 102those whose good deeds weigh
heavy will be successful, 103but those whose balance is light will have
lost their souls for ever and will stay in Hell– –104the Fire will scorch
their faces and their lips will be twisted in pain. 105‘Were My
messages not recited over and over to you and still you rejectedthem?’ 106They will say, ‘Lord, our waywardness overcame us and we
went astray. 107Lord, take us away from this and if we go back to our
old ways, then we shall really be evildoers.’ 108He will say, ‘Away with
you! In you go! Do not speak to Me! 109Among My servants there
were those who said, “Lord, We believe. Forgive us and have mercyon us: You are the most merciful of all.” 110But you kept on laugh-
ing at them: so intent were you on laughing at them that it made
you forget My warning. 111Today I have rewarded them for their
patience: it is they who will succeed.’ 112He will say, ‘How many
years were you on earth?’ 113and they will reply, ‘We stayed a day or a
part of a day, but ask those who keep count.’ 114He will say, ‘You
stayed but a little, if you had only known. 115Did you think We had
created you in vain, and that you would not be brought back to Us?’
116Exalted be God, the true King, there is no god but Him, the
Lord of the Glorious Throne! 117Whoever prays to another god
alongside Him– – a god for whose existence he has no evidence– – will
face his reckoning with his Lord. Those who reject the truth will notprosper. 118Say [Prophet], ‘Lord, forgive and have mercy: You are
the most merciful of all.’The Believers
219 23:11824. LIGHT
This Medinan sura clari ﬁes several regulations for the Muslim community,
mainly to do with marriage, modesty, obedience to the Prophet, and appropri-ate behaviour in the household. The initial context is the false rumour against
῾A ᾿isha, the Prophet’s wife, who was left behind unwittingly by her travelling
companions after wandering away in search of a dropped necklace. She wasescorted back to Medina by a Muslim man coming later who found her there.The sura is named after the Verse of Light (verses 35–6) where God’s light is
contrasted to the darkness in which the disbelievers ﬁnd themselves engulfed.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1This is a sura We have sent down and made obligatory: We have
sent down clear revelations in it, so that you may take heed. 2Strike
the adulteress and the adulterera one hundred times.b Do not let
compassion for them keep you from carrying out God’s law– –if youbelieve in God and the Last Day– –and ensure that a group ofbelievers witnesses the punishment. 3The adulterer is only [ ﬁt] to
marry
c an adulteress or an idolatress, and the adulteress is only [ ﬁt]
to marry an adulterer or an idolater: such behaviour is forbidden tobelievers. 4As for those who accuse chaste women of fornication, and
then fail to provide four witnesses, strike them eighty times, andreject their testimony ever afterwards: they are the lawbreakers,5except for those who repent later and make amends– –God is most
forgiving and merciful.
6As for those who accuse their own wives of adultery, but have no
other witnesses, let each one four times call God to witness that he istelling the truth, 7and, the ﬁfth time, call God to reject him if he is
lying; 8punishment shall be averted from his wife if she in turn four
times calls God to witness that her husband is lying 9and, the ﬁfth
time, calls God to reject her if he is telling the truth.
aThe crime of zina in Arabic covers all extramarital sexual intercourse between a
man and a woman.
bJalada  in Arabic means ‘hit the skin’ with the hand or anything else. There are
reports that people used shoes, clothes, etc. (Bukhari, Hudud 4).
cThis is not an injunction but a statement of fact, emphasizing the guilt of both.
There is another opinion that yankihu  is used in its original sense of ‘copulate’. Which-
ever translation is used, this is not part of the punishment but a condemnation of thecrime.10If it were not for God’s bounty and mercy towards you, if it were
not that God accepts repentance and is wise . . .!a11It was a group
from among you that concocted the lieb– –do not consider it a bad
thing for you [people]; it was a good thing– –and every one of themwill be charged with the sin he has earned. He who took the greatestpart in it will have a painful punishment. 12When you heard the lie,
why did believing men and women not think well of their ownpeople and declare, ‘This is obviously a lie’? 13And why did the
accusers not bring four witnesses to it? If they cannot produce suchwitnesses, they are the liars in God’s eyes. 14If it were not for God’s
bounty and mercy towards you in this world and the next, you wouldalready have been a ﬄicted by terrible su ﬀering for indulging in such
talk. 15When you took it up with your tongues, and spoke with your
mouths things you did not know [to be true], you thought it wastrivial but to God it was very serious. 16When you heard the lie, why
did you not say, ‘We should not repeat this– – God forbid!– – It is a
monstrous slander’? 17God warns you never to do anything like this
again, if you are true believers. 18God makes His messages clear to
you: God is all knowing, all wise. 19A painful punishment waits in
this world and the next for those who like indecency to spreadamong the believers: God knows and you do not. 20If it were not for
God’s bounty and mercy and the fact that He is compassionate andmerciful . . .! 21Believers, do not follow in Satan’s footsteps– – if you
do so, he will urge you to indecency and evil. If it were not for God’s
bounty and mercy towards you, not one of you would ever have
attained purity. God puri ﬁes whoever He will: God is all hearing,
all seeing.
22Those who have been graced with bounty and plenty should not
swear that they will [no longer] give to kinsmen, the poor, thosewho emigrated in God’s way:
c let them pardon and forgive. Do you
not wish that God should forgive you? God is most forgiving andmerciful.
aThe statement ‘If it were not for God’s bounty and mercy’ is repeated four times
in this context, but the concluding clauses are suspended in verses 10 and 20. This
rhetorical suspense works in English and in Arabic. (See verses 14,20,21).
bThis alludes to the accusation made against ῾A ᾿isha, the Prophet’s wife.
cAbu Bakr, father of ῾A ᾿isha, who used to support a relative called Mistah, swore,
when Mistah participated in spreading the rumour, that he would never support Mistahagain.Light 221 24:2223Those who accuse honourable but unwary believing women are
rejected by God, in this life and the next. A painful punishmentawaits them 24on the Day when their own tongues, hands, and feet
will testify against them about what they have done– –25on that Day,
God will pay them their just due in full– – and they will realize that
God is the Truth that makes everything clear. 26Corrupt women are
for corrupt men, and corrupt men are for corrupt women; good
women are for good men and good men are for good women. Thegood are innocent of what has been said against them; they will have
forgiveness and a generous provision.
27Believers, do not enter other people’s houses until you have
asked permission to do so and greeted those inside– – that is best for
you: perhaps you will bear this in mind. 28If you ﬁnd no one in, do
not enter unless you have been given permission to do so. If you aretold, ‘Go away’, then do so– – that is more proper for you. God knows
well what you do. 29You will not be blamed for entering houses where
no one lives, and which could provide you with some useful service.God knows everything you do openly and everything you conceal.30[Prophet], tell believing men to lower their glances and guard their
private parts: that is purer for them. God is well aware of everythingthey do. 31And tell believing women that they should lower their
glances, guard their private parts, and not display their charms
beyond what [it is acceptable] to reveal;
a they should let their head-
scarves fall to cover their necklines and not reveal their charmsexcept to their husbands, their fathers, their husbands’ fathers, theirsons, their husbands’ sons, their brothers, their brothers’ sons, theirsisters’ sons, their womenfolk, their slaves, such men as attend themwho have no sexual desire, or children who are not yet aware ofwomen’s nakedness; they should not stamp their feet so as to drawattention to any hidden charms. Believers, all of you, turn to God sothat you may prosper.
32Marry o ﬀ
b the single among you and those of your male and
female slaves who are ﬁt [for marriage].c If they are poor, God will
aLiterally ‘beyond what [ordinarily] shows’. This phrase is ambiguous in Arabic.
Recourse is commonly made to the hadith  (prophetic tradition), which uses the same
verb dhahara  in the sense of its being permissible for a woman to show only her face and
her hands in front of strangers.
bThere is another reading that translates as ‘marry’.
cOr ‘righteous’.The Qur ᾿an 24:23 222provide for them from His bounty: God’s bounty is in ﬁnite and He
is all knowing. 33Those who are unable to marry should keep chaste
until God gives them enough out of His bounty. If any of your slaveswish to pay for their freedom, make a contract with them accord-ingly, if you know they have good in them, and give them some ofthe wealth God has given you. Do not force your slave-girls intoprostitution, when they themselves wish to remain honourable, inyour quest for the short-term gains of this world, although, if theyare forced, God will be forgiving and merciful to them.
34We have sent verses down to you [people] clarifying the right
path, examples of those who passed away before you, and advice forthose who are mindful of God.
35God is the Light of the heavens and earth. His Light is like this:
there is a niche, and in it a lamp, the lamp inside a glass, a glass like aglittering star, fuelled from a blessed olive tree from neither east norwest, whose oil almost gives light even when no ﬁre touches it– –
light upon light– – God guides whoever He will to his Light; God
draws such comparisons for people; God has full knowledge ofeverything– –36shining out in houses of worship. God has ordained
that they be raised high and that His name be remembered in them,with men in them celebrating His glory morning and evening:37men who are not distracted,
a either by commerce or pro ﬁt, from
remembering God, keeping up the prayer, and paying the pre-scribed alms, fearing a day when hearts and eyes will turn over.38God will reward such people according to the best of their actions,
and He will give them more of His bounty: God provides limitlesslyfor anyone He will.
39But the deeds of those who disbelieve are like a mirage in a
desert: the thirsty person thinks there will be water but, when he
gets there, he ﬁnds only God, who pays him his account in full– –
God is swift in reckoning. 40Or like shadows in a deep sea covered by
wave upon wave, with clouds above– – layer upon layer of darkness– –
if he holds out his hand, he is scarcely able to see it. The one towhom God gives no light has no light at all.
41[Prophet], do you not see that all those who are in the heavens
and earth praise God, as do the birds with wings outstretched?Each knows its [own way] of prayer and glori ﬁcation: God has full
aCf. 62:11, which makes reference to worshippers who are distracted by trade.Light 223 24:41knowledge of what they do. 42Control of the heavens and earth
belongs to God: and to God is the ﬁnal return. 43Do you not see
that God drives the clouds, then gathers them together and pilesthem up until you see rain pour from their midst? He sends haildown from [such] mountains in the sky, pouring it on whoever Hewishes and diverting it from whoever He wishes– – the ﬂash of its
lightning almost snatches sight away. 44God alternates night and
day–– there truly is a lesson in [all] this for those who have eyes to
see––45and God created each animal out of [its own] ﬂuid:
a some of
them crawl on their bellies, some walk on two legs, and some on four.God creates whatever He will; God has power over everything.
46We have sent verses that clarify the right path: God guides
whoever He will to a straight path. 47They say, ‘We believe in God
and the Messenger; we obey,’ but then some of them turn away:these people are not true believers 48and when they are summoned to
God and His Messenger in order for him to judge between them,some of them turn away. 49If they were claiming their right, they
would come willingly [to the Prophet]. 50Do they have sickness in
their hearts? Are they full of doubts? Do they fear that God and His
Messenger might deal with them unjustly? No, it is they who are theunjust ones. 51When the true believers are summoned to God and
His Messenger in order for him to judge between them, they say, ‘Wehear and we obey.’ These are the ones who will prosper: 52whoever
obeys God and His Messenger, stands in awe of God, and keeps hisduty to Him will be triumphant. 53[The others] solemnly swear by
God that if you [Prophet] commanded them, they would march out.Tell them, ‘Do not swear: it is reasonable obedience that is required,and God is aware of everything you do.’ 54Say, ‘Obey God; obey the
Messenger. If you turn away, [know that] he is responsible for theduty placed upon him, and you are responsible for the duty placedupon you. If you obey him, you will be rightly guided, but theMessenger’s duty is only to deliver the message clearly.’
55God has made a promise to those among you who believe and
do good deeds: He will make them successors to the land, as He didthose who came before them; He will empower the religion He haschosen for them; He will grant them security to replace their fear.
aThis ma ᾿ is not ‘water’, which would have the generic al- (cf. 21:30), but is for each
animal a special, essential ﬂuid, and so each creature is di ﬀerent, as is clear from what
follows.The Qur ᾿an 24:42 224‘They will worship Me and not join anything with Me.’ Those who
are de ﬁant after that will be the rebels.– –56[People], keep up the
prayer, pay the prescribed alms, and obey the Messenger, so that youmay be given mercy. 57Do not think [Prophet] that the disbelievers
can escape God on earth; the Fire will be their ﬁnal home, an evil
end.
58Believers, your slaves and any who have not yet reached puberty
should ask your permission to come in at three times of day: before
the dawn prayer; when you lay your garments aside in the middayheat; and after the evening prayer. These are your three times forprivacy; at other times, there is no blame on you or them if you movearound each other freely. In this way God makes messages clear:God is all knowing, all wise. 59When your children reach puberty,
they should [always] ask your permission to enter, like their eldersdo. This is how God makes His messages clear to you: God is allknowing, all wise. 60No blame will be attached to elderly women who
are not hoping for sex, if they take o ﬀ their outer garments without
ﬂaunting their charms, but it is preferable for them not to do this:
God is all hearing, all seeing.
61No blame will be attached to the blind, the lame, the sick.
a
Whether you eat in your own houses, or those of your fathers,
your mothers, your brothers, your sisters, your paternal uncles,your paternal aunts, your maternal uncles, your maternal aunts,houses you have the keys for, or any of your friends’ houses, you willnot be blamed: you will not be blamed whether you eat in company
or separately.
b When you enter any house, greet one another with a
greeting of blessing and goodness as enjoined by God. This is howGod makes His messages clear to you so that you may understand.
62The true believers are those who believe in God and His Mes-
senger, who, when they are gathered with him on a communal mat-ter, do not depart until they have asked his permission– – those who
ask your permission [Prophet] are the ones who truly believe in Godand His Messenger. When they ask your permission to attend totheir private a ﬀairs, allow whoever you see ﬁt and ask God to forgive
aCommentators state that the blind etc. refrained from eating with the healthy, or
that the healthy refused to eat with them, and many link this statement to the followingone.
bSome commentators take this to be a quali ﬁcation of 4:29, which was interpreted
by some Muslims as a prohibition on eating at each other’s houses without invitation.Light 225 24:62them. God is most forgiving and merciful. 63[People], do not regard
the Messenger’s summons to you like one of you summoninganother– – God is well aware of those of you who steal away surrepti-
tiously– – and those who go against his order should beware lest a trial
aﬄict them or they receive a painful punishment.
64Everything in the heavens and earth belongs to God: He knows
what state you are in– – on the Day when all are returned to Him, He
will tell them everything they have done– – God has full knowledge of
everything.The Qur ᾿an 24:63 22625. THE DIFFERENTIATOR
A Meccan sura that starts with a denunciation of polytheism, then deals with
the disbelievers’ arguments against the Prophet, the Qur ᾿an, and the Day of
Judgement. It warns them of their fate, citing examples of earlier peoples. Thesura describes the power and grace of God, and ends with the qualities of truebelievers (verses 63–76).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Exalteda is He who has sent the Di ﬀerentiatorb down to His
servant so that it may be a warning to all people. 2It is He who has
control over the heavens and earth and has no o ﬀspring– –no one
shares control with Him– –and who created all things and made themto an exact measure. 3Yet the disbelievers take as their gods things
beneath Him that create nothing, and are themselves created, thatcan neither harm nor help themselves, and have no control overdeath, life, or resurrection.
4The disbelievers say, ‘This can only be a lie he has forged with
the help of others’– –they themselves have done great wrong and told
lies– – 5and they say, ‘It is just ancient fables, which he has had
written down: they are dictated to him morning and evening.’ 6Say,
‘It was sent down by Him who knows the secrets of the heavens andearth. He is all forgiving, all merciful.’ 7They also say, ‘What sort of
messenger is this? He eats food and walks about in the marketplaces!Why has no angel been sent down to help him with his warnings?8Why has he not been given treasure or a garden to supply his food?’
and the evildoers say, ‘The man you follow is simply under a spell.’9See what they think you are like! They have gone astray and cannot
ﬁnd the right way. 10Exalted is He who can, if He wishes, give you
better things than these: Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams, and
palaces too. 11It is actually the coming of the Hour that they reject:
aThis meaning of tabarak  is supported by Razi and is more appropriate here than
‘blessed’.
bAl-furqan , another name for the Qur ᾿an. The word means ‘that which di ﬀerentiates
right from wrong’.We have prepared a blazing ﬁre for those who reject the Hour.
12When it sees them from a distance, they will hear it raging and
roaring, 13and when they are hurled into a narrow part of it, chained
together, they will cry out for death. 14‘Do not cry out this day for
one death, but for many.’ 15Say, ‘Which is better, this or the lasting
Garden that those who are mindful of God have been promised astheir reward and journey’s end?’ 16There they will ﬁnd everything
they wish for, and there they will stay. [Prophet], this is a bindingpromise from your Lord. 17On the Day He gathers them all together
with those they worship beside Him, He will say, ‘Was it you [false
gods] who led these creatures of Mine astray, or did they stray fromthe path by themselves?’ 18They will say, ‘May You be exalted! We
ourselves would never take masters other than You! But You granted
them and their forefathers pleasures in this life, until they forgotYour Reminder and were ruined.’ 19[God will say], ‘Now your gods
have denounced what you say as lies: you cannot avoid the punish-ment; you will not get any help.’ If any of you commits such evil, Weshall make him taste agonizing torment.
20No messenger have We sent before you [Muhammad] who did
not eat food and walk about in the marketplace. But We have madesome of you a means of testing others– – will you stand fast? Your
Lord is always watching. 21Those who do not fear to meet Us say,
‘Why are the angels not sent down to us?’ or ‘Why can we not see ourLord?’ They are too proud of themselves and too insolent. 22There
will be no good news for the guilty on the Day they see the angels.The angels will say, ‘You cannot cross the forbidden barrier,’
a23and
We shall turn to the deeds they have done and scatter them like dust.24But the companions in the Garden will have a better home on that
Day, and a fairer place to rest. 25On the Day when the sky and its
clouds are split apart and the angels sent down in streams, 26on that
Day, true authority belongs to the Lord of Mercy. It will be a griev-ous Day for the disbelievers. 27On that Day the evildoer will bite his
own hand and say, ‘If only I had taken the same path as the Messen-ger. 28Woe is me! If only I had not taken so and so as a friend– –29he
led me away from the Revelation after it reached me. Satan hasalways betrayed mankind.’
30The Messenger has said, ‘Lord, my people treat this Qur ᾿an
aCf. 23:100.25:12 228 The Qur ᾿anas something to be shunned,’ 31but We have always appointed adver-
saries from the wicked, for every prophet: Your Lord is su ﬃcient
guide and helper. 32The disbelievers also say, ‘Why was the Qur ᾿an
not sent down to him all at once?’ We sent it in this way to strengthenyour heart [Prophet]; We gave it to you in gradual revelation. 33They
cannot put any argument to you without Our bringing you the truthand the best explanation. 34It is those driven [falling], on their faces,
a
to Hell who will be in the worst place– – they are the furthest from
the right path.
35We gave Moses the Book and appointed his brother Aaron to
help him. 36We said, ‘Go, both of you, to the people who have
rejected Our signs.’ Later We destroyed those people utterly. 37The
people of Noah, too: when they rejected their messengers, We
drowned them and made them an example to all people. We have
prepared a painful torment for the evildoers, 38as We did for the
people of ῾Ad, Thamud, and al-Rass, and many generations in
between. 39To each of them We gave warnings, and each of them We
destroyed completely. 40These disbelievers must have passed by the
town that was destroyed by the terrible rainb– –did they not see it?
Yet they do not expect to be raised from the dead. 41Whenever they
see you [Prophet] they ridicule you: ‘Is this the one God has sent as amessenger? 42He might almost have led us astray from our gods if we
had not stood so ﬁrmly by them.’ When they see the punishment,
they will know who is furthest from the path. 43Think [Prophet] of
the man who has taken his own passion as a god: are you to be hisguardian? 44Do you think that most of them hear or understand?
They are just like cattle– – no, they are further from the path.
45Do you not see how your Lord lengthens the shade? If He had
willed, He could have made it stand still– – We made the sun its indi-
cator– –46but We gradually draw it towards Us, little by little. 47It is
He who made the night a garment for you, and sleep a rest, andmade the day like a resurrection. 48It is He who sends the winds as
heralds of good news before His Mercy.
c We send down pure water
from the sky, 49so that We can revive a dead land with it, and We give
it as a drink to many animals and people We have created. 50Many
times We have repeated this to people so that they might take heed,but most persist in their ingratitude. 51If it had been Our will, We
aCf. 67:22.bSee15:74,76.cThe rain.229 25:51 The Di ﬀerentiatorwould have sent a warner to every town, 52so do not give in to the
disbelievers: strive hard against them with this Qur ᾿an.
53It is He who released the two bodies of ﬂowing water, one sweet
and fresh and the other salty and bitter, and put an insurmountablebarrier between them. 54It is He who creates human beings from
ﬂuid, then makes them kin by blood and marriage: your Lord is all
powerful! 55Yet instead of God they worship things that can neither
beneﬁt nor harm them: the disbeliever has always turned his back on
his Lord. 56We sent you only to give good news and warning. 57Say,
‘I am not asking for any reward for it, but anyone who wishes should
take a path to his Lord.’ 58Put your trust in the Living [God] who
never dies, and celebrate His praise. He knows the sins of His ser-
vants well enough: 59it is He who created the heavens and earth and
what is between them in six Days,
a and then established Himself on
the throne– – He is the Lord of Mercy; He is the Best Informed.b
60Yet when they are told, ‘Bow down before the Lord of Mercy,’ they
say, ‘What is the Lord of Mercy? Should we bow down before any-thing you command?’ and they turn even further away. 61Exalted
is He who put constellations in the heavens, a radiant light, andan illuminating moon– –62it is He who made the night and day
follow each other– – so anyone who wishes may be mindful or show
gratitude.
63The servants of the Lord of Mercy are those who walk humbly
on the earth, and who, when the foolish address them, reply, ‘Peace’;64those who spend the night bowed down or standing, worshipping
their Lord, 65who plead, ‘Our Lord, turn away from us the su ﬀering
of Hell, for it is a dreadful torment to su ﬀer! 66It is an evil home, a
foul resting place!’ 67They are those who are neither wasteful nor
niggardly when they spend, but keep to a just balance; 68those who
never invoke any other deity beside God, nor take a life, which Godhas made sacred, except in the pursuit of justice, nor commit adul-
tery. (Whoever does these things will face the penalties: 69their tor-
ment will be doubled on the Day of Resurrection, and they willremain in torment, disgraced, 70except those who repent, believe,
aCf. 41:9–12.
bOther readings of this phrase include ‘ask someone who knows’ or ‘ask anyone
how well informed He is’, but the expression fas ᾿al, ‘ask someone’, at the beginning of
the phrase is a rhetorical device suggesting the truth of the statement and need notbe translated literally.25:52 230 The Qur ᾿anand do good deeds: God will change the evil deeds of such people
into good ones. He is most forgiving, most merciful. 71People who
repent and do good deeds truly return to God.)
72[The servants of the Lord of Mercy are] those who do not give
false testimony, and who, when they see some frivolity, pass by withdignity; 73who, when reminded of their Lord’s signs, do not turn a
deaf ear and a blind eye to them; 74those who pray, ‘Our Lord, give
us joy in our spouses and o ﬀspring. Make us good examples to those
who are aware of You’. 75These servants will be rewarded with the
highest place in Paradise for their steadfastness. There they will be
met with greetings and peace. 76There they will stay– – a happy home
and resting place! 77[Prophet, tell the disbelievers], ‘What are you to
my Lord without your supplication? But since you have written o ﬀ
the truth as lies, the inevitable will happen.’
a
aThe punishment (cf. 4:147).231 25:77 The Di ﬀerentiator26. THE POETS
A Meccan sura which takes its name from the reference to poets in verse 224. It
talks about the disbelievers who belittle the Qur ᾿an, and gives examples of
God’s power and grace in nature. It recounts several stories of earlier prophets,the reactions of their people, and punishments that a ﬄicted them, ending by
conﬁrming the divine origin of the Qur ᾿an. It is not something brought down
by the jinn, nor is it poetry.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Ta Sin Mim
2These are the verses of the Scripture that makes things clear:
3[Prophet], are you going to worry yourself to death because they
will not believe? 4If We had wished, We could have sent them down a
sign from heaven, at which their necks would stay bowed in utter
humility. 5Whenever they are brought a new revelation from the
Lord of Mercy, they turn away: 6they deny it, but the truth of what
they scorned will soon hit them. 7Do they not see the earth, and
what noble kinds of thing We grow in it? 8There truly is a sign in
this, though most of them do not believe: 9your Lord alone is the
Almighty, the Merciful.
10Your Lord called to Moses: ‘Go to those wrongdoers, 11the
people of Pharaoh. Will they not take heed?’ 12Moses said, ‘My
Lord, I fear they will call me a liar, 13and I will feel stressed and
tongue-tied, so send Aaron too; 14besides, they have a chargea
against me, and I fear they may kill me.’ 15God said, ‘No [they will
not]. Go, both of you, with Our signs– –We shall be with you, listen-ing. 16Go, both of you, to Pharaoh and say, “We bring a message
from the Lord of the Worlds: 17let the Children of Israel leave
with us.” ’
18Pharaoh said, ‘Did we not bring you up as a child among us?
Did you not stay with us for many years? 19And then you committed
that crime of yours: you were so ungrateful.’ 20Moses replied, ‘I was
aCf. 28:15–20.misguided when I did it 21and I ﬂed from you in fear; later my Lord
gave me wisdom and made me one of His messengers. 22And is
this–– that you have enslaved the Children of Israel– – the favour with
which you reproach me?’
23Pharaoh asked, ‘What is this “Lord of the Worlds”?’ 24Moses
replied, ‘He is the Lord of the heavens and earth and everythingbetween them. If you would only have faith!’ 25Pharaoh said to those
present, ‘Do you hear what he says?’ 26Moses said, ‘He is your Lord
and the Lord of your forefathers.’ 27Pharaoh said, ‘This messenger
who has been sent to you is truly possessed.’ 28Moses continued,
‘Lord of the East and West and everything between them. If youwould only use your reason!’ 29But Pharaoh said [to him], ‘If you
take any god other than me, I will throw you into prison,’ 30and
Moses asked, ‘Even if I show you something convincing?’ 31‘Show it
then,’ said Pharaoh, ‘if you are telling the truth.’ 32So Moses threw
down his sta ﬀ and– – lo and behold!– – it became a snake for everyone
to see. 33Then he drew out his hand and– – lo and behold!– – it was
white for the onlookers to see. 34Pharaoh said to the counsellors
around him, ‘This man is a learned sorcerer! 35He means to use his
sorcery to drive you out of your land! What do you suggest?’ 36They
answered, ‘Delay him and his brother for a while, and send messen-gers to all the cities 37to bring every accomplished sorcerer to you.’
38The sorcerers were [to be] assembled at the appointed time on a
certain day 39and the people were asked, 40‘Are you all coming? We
may follow the sorcerers if they win!’
41When the sorcerers came, they said to Pharaoh, ‘Shall we be
rewarded if we win?’ 42and he said, ‘Yes, and you will join my inner
court.’ 43Moses said to them, ‘Throw down whatever you will.’
44They threw their ropes and sta ﬀs, saying, ‘By Pharaoh’s might, we
shall be victorious.’ 45But Moses threw his sta ﬀ and– – lo and
behold!– – it swallowed up their trickery 46and the sorcerers fell down
on their knees, 47exclaiming, ‘We believe in the Lord of the Worlds,
48the Lord of Moses and Aaron.’ 49Pharaoh said, ‘How dare you
believe in him before I have given you permission? He must be themaster who taught you sorcery! Soon you will see: I will cut o ﬀ
 your
alternate hands and feeta and then crucify the lot of you!’ 50‘That
will do us no harm,’ they said, ‘for we are sure to return to our
aSee note to 5:33.The Poets 233 26:50Lord. 51We hope that our Lord will forgive us our sins, as we were
theﬁrst to believe.’
52Then We revealed Our will to Moses, ‘Leave with My servants
by night, for you will be pursued!’ 53Pharaoh sent messengers into
the cities, proclaiming, 54‘These people are a puny band– – 55they
have enraged us– –56and we are a large army, on the alert.’ 57So it was
that We made them leave their gardens and their springs, 58their
treasures and their noble dwellings– –59We gave [such] things [later]a
to the Children of Israel. 60Pharaoh and his people pursued them at
sunrise, 61and as soon as the two sides came within sight of one
another, Moses’ followers said, ‘We shall de ﬁnitely be caught.’
62Moses said, ‘No, my Lord is with me: He will guide me,’ 63and We
revealed to Moses: ‘Strike the sea with your sta ﬀ.’ It parted– – each
side like a mighty mountain– –64and We brought the others to that
place: 65We saved Moses and all his companions, 66and drowned the
rest. 67There truly is a sign in this, though most of them do not
believe: 68your Lord alone is the Almighty, the Merciful.
69Tell them the story of Abraham, 70when he asked his father and
his people, ‘What do you worship?’ 71They said, ‘We worship idols,
and are constantly in attendance on them.’ 72He asked, ‘Do they
hear you when you call? 73Do they help or harm you?’ 74They
replied, ‘No, but this is what we saw our fathers doing.’ 75Abraham
said, ‘Those idols you have worshipped, 76you and your forefathers,
77are my enemies; not so the Lord of the Worlds, 78who created me.
It is He who guides me; 79He who gives me food and drink; 80He
who cures me when I am ill; 81He who will make me die and then
give me life again; 82and He who will, I hope, forgive my faults on
the Day of Judgement. 83My Lord, grant me wisdom; join me with
the righteous; 84give me a good name among later generations;
85make me one of those given the Garden of Bliss– –86forgive my
father, for he is one of those who have gone astray– –87and do not
disgrace me on the Day when all people are resurrected: 88the Day
when neither wealth nor children can help, 89when the only one who
will be saved is the one who comes before God with a heart devotedto Him.’
90When the Garden is brought near to the righteous 91and the Fire
is placed in full view of the misguided, 92it will be said to them,
aCf. 7:137.The Qur ᾿an 26:51 234‘Where are those you worshipped 93beside God? Can they help you
now, or even help themselves?’ 94and then they will all be hurled into
Hell, together with those that misled them, 95and all Iblis’s sup-
porters.a96There they will say to their gods, as they bicker among
themselves, 97‘We were clearly misguided 98when we made you equal
with the Lord of the Worlds. 99It was the evildoers who led us astray,
100and now we have no intercessor 101and no true friend. 102If only we
could live our lives again, we would be true believers!’ 103There truly
is a sign in this, though most of them do not believe: 104your Lord
alone is the Almighty, the Merciful.
105The people of Noah, too, called the messengers liars. 106Their
brother Noah said to them, ‘Will you not be mindful of God? 107I am
a faithful messenger sent to you: 108be mindful of God and obey me.
109I ask no reward of you, for my only reward is with the Lord of the
Worlds: 110be mindful of God and obey me.’ 111They answered,
‘Why should we believe you when the worst sort of people followyou?’ 112He said, ‘What knowledge do I have of what they used to
do? 113It is for my Lord alone to bring them to account– – if only you
could see– –114I will not drive believers away. 115I am here only to give
people a clear warning.’ 116So they said, ‘Noah, if you do not stop
this, you will be stoned.’ 117He said, ‘My Lord, my people have
rejected me, 118so make a ﬁrm judgement between me and them, and
save me and my believing followers.’ 119So We saved him and his
followers in the fully laden ship, 120and drowned the rest. 121There
truly is a sign in this, though most of them do not believe: 122your
Lord alone is the Almighty, the Merciful.
123The people of ῾Ad, too, called the messengers liars. 124Their
brother Hud said to them, ‘Will you not be mindful of God? 125I am
a faithful messenger sent to you: 126be mindful of God and obey me.
127I ask no reward of you, for my only reward is with the Lord of the
Worlds. 128How can you be so vain that you set up monuments on
every high place? 129Do you build fortresses because you hope to be
immortal? 130Why do you act like tyrants whenever you attack some-
one? 131
Be mindful of God and obey me; 132be mindful of Him who
has provided you with everything you know– –133He has given you
livestock, sons, 134gardens, springs– –135for I truly fear that the tor-
ment of a grievous day will overtake you.’ 136They replied, ‘It makes
aSee note to 37:173.The Poets 235 26:136no di ﬀerence to us whether you warn us or not, 137for we only do
what our forefathers used to do: 138we shall not be punished.’
139They denounced him as a liar, and so We destroyed them. There
truly is a sign in this, though most of them do not believe: 140your
Lord alone is the Almighty, the Merciful.
141The people of Thamud, too, called the messengers liars.
142Their brother Salih said to them, ‘Will you not be mindful of
God? 143I am a faithful messenger to you: 144be mindful of God and
obey me. 145I ask no reward from you, for my only reward is with the
Lord of the Worlds. 146[Do you think] you will be left secure for ever
in what you have here– –147gardens, springs, 148ﬁelds, palm trees
laden with fruit– –149carving your ﬁne houses from the mountains?
150Be mindful of God and obey me: 151do not obey those who are
given to excess 152and who spread corruption in the land instead of
doing what is right.’ 153They said, ‘You are bewitched! 154You are
nothing but a man like us. Show us a sign, if you are telling thetruth.’ 155He said, ‘Here is a camel. She should have her turn to
drink and so should you, each on a speci ﬁed day, 156so do not harm
her, or the punishment of a terrible day will befall you.’ 157But they
hamstrung her. In the morning they had cause to regret it: 158the
punishment fell upon them. There truly is a sign in this, thoughmost of them will not believe: 159your Lord alone is the Almighty, the
Merciful.
160The people of Lot, too, called the messengers liars. 161Their
brother Lot said to them, ‘Will you not be mindful of God? 162I am a
faithful messenger to you: 163be mindful of God and obey me. 164I
ask no reward from you, for my only reward is with the Lord of theWorlds. 165Must you, unlike [other] people, lust after males 166and
abandon the wives that God has created for you? You are exceedingall bounds,’ 167but they replied, ‘Lot! If you do not stop this, you will
be driven away.’ 168So he said, ‘I loathe what you do: 169Lord, save me
and my family from what they are doing.’ 170We saved him and all his
family, 
171except for an old woman who stayed behind, 172then We
destroyed the others, 173and poured a rain of destruction down upon
them. How dreadful that rain was for those who had been fore-
warned! 174There truly is a sign in this, though most of them will not
believe: 175your Lord alone is the Almighty, the Merciful.
176The forest-dwellers, too, called the messengers liars. 177Shu ῾ayb
said to them, ‘Will you not be mindful of God? 178I am a faithfulThe Qur ᾿an 26:137 236messenger to you: 179be mindful of God and obey me. 180I ask no
reward of you, for my only reward is with the Lord of the Worlds.181Give full measure: do not sell others short. 182Weigh with correct
scales: 183do not deprive people of what is theirs. Do not spread
corruption on earth. 184Be mindful of God who created you and
former generations,’ 185but they replied, ‘You are bewitched! 186You
are nothing but a man like us. In fact we think you are a liar. 187Make
bits of the heavens fall down on us, if you are telling the truth.’ 188He
said, ‘My Lord knows best what you do.’ 189They called him a liar,
and so the torment of the Day of Shadow came upon them– – it was
the torment of a terrible day. 190There truly is a sign in this, though
most of them will not believe: 191your Lord alone is the Almighty, the
Merciful.
192Truly, this Qur ᾿an has been sent down by the Lord of the
Worlds: 193the Trustworthy Spirit
a brought it down 194to your heart
[Prophet], so that you could bring warning 195in a clear Arabic
tongue. 196This was foretold in the scriptures of earlier religions.
197Is it not proof enough for them that the learned men of the
Children of Israel have recognized it? 198If We had sent it down to
someone who was not an Arab,b199and he had recited it to them,
they still would not have believed in it. 200So We make it pass straight
through the hearts of the guilty: 201they will not believe in it until
they see the grievous torment, 202which will suddenly hit them when
they are not expecting it, 203and then they will say, ‘Can we have
more time?’ 204How can they ask that Our punishment be brought to
them sooner? 205Think, if we let them enjoy this life for some years
206and then the promised torment came upon them, 207what good
would their past enjoyment be to them? 208Never have We destroyed
a town without sending down messengers to warn it, 209as a reminder
from Us: We are never unjust.
210It was not the jinnc who brought down this Qur ᾿an: 211it is
neither in their interests nor in their power, 212indeed they are pre-
vented from overhearing it. 213So [Prophet] do not invoke any gods
beside God, or you will incur punishment. 214Warn your nearest
kinsfolk 215and lower your wing tenderly over the believers who
aGenerally understood to mean the Angel Gabriel.
bThis alludes to the refusal of many Meccan Arabs to believe that revelation could
come to a man from among themselves.
cCf. 72:8–9;37:7–10.The Poets 237 26:215follow you. 216If they disobey you, say, ‘I bear no responsibility for
your actions.’ 217Put your trust in the Almighty, the Merciful, 218who
sees you when you stand up [for prayer] 219and sees your movements
among the worshippers: 220He is the All Hearing, the All Knowing.
221Shall I tell you who the jinn come down to? 222They come down to
every lying sinner 223who readily lends an ear to them, and most of
them are liars: 224only those who are lost in error follow the poets.a
225Do you not see how they rove aimlessly in every valley; 226how
they say what they do not do?b227Not so those [poets] who believe, do
good deeds, remember God often, and defend themselves afterthey have been wronged. The evildoers will ﬁnd out what they will
return to.
aThe Meccans dismissed the Qur ᾿an as poetry. After the Prophet moved to Medina,
the Meccans commissioned poets to satirize the Muslims, and some Muslim poetscounter-attacked.
bPoets used to boast and exaggerate in their praise-poems and satires.The Qur ᾿an 26:216 23827. THE ANTS
A Meccan sura which takes its title from the ants mentioned in the Solomon
story (verses 18–19). It both opens and closes by describing the Qur ᾿an as joyful
news for the believers and a warning for others. It gives stories of past prophetsand the destruction of the communities that disbelieved in them. Illustrationsare given of the nature of God’s power, contrasted with the total lack of powerof the ‘partners’ they worship beside Him, and descriptions are given of theDay of Judgement for those who deny it.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Ta Sin
These are the verses of the Qur ᾿an– –a scripture that makes things
clear; 2a guide and joyful news for the believers 3who keep up the
prayer, pay the prescribed alms, and believe ﬁrmly in the life to
come. 4As for those who do not believe in the life to come, We have
made their deeds seem alluring to them, so they wander blindly: 5it
is they who will have the worst su ﬀering, and will be the ones to lose
most in the life to come. 6You [Prophet] receive the Qur ᾿an from One
who is all wise, all knowing.
7Moses said to his family, ‘I have seen a ﬁre. I will bring you news
from there, or a burning stick for you to warm yourselves.’ 8When he
reached the ﬁre, a voice called: ‘Blessed is the person near this ﬁrea
and those around it;b may God be exalted, the Lord of the Worlds.
9Moses, I am God, the Mighty, the Wise. 10Throw down your sta ﬀ,’
but when he saw it moving like a snake, he turned and ﬂed. ‘Moses,
do not be afraid! The messengers need have no fear in My presence,11I am truly most forgiving and merciful to those who do wrong,
c
and then replace their evil with good. 12Put your hand inside your
cloak and it will come out white, but unharmed. These are among
aMoses or God. Literally ‘in this ﬁre’ (ﬁ al-nari ). Zamakhshari interprets ﬁ as ‘near’,
while Qatada and Zajjaj understand nar ‘ﬁre’ to mean nur ‘light’ (Razi).
bThe angels.
cCf. 28:15. This is an allusion to a man Moses killed in Egypt.the nine signs that you will show Pharaoh and his people; they have
really gone too far.’
13But when Our enlightening signs came to them, they said, ‘This
is clearly [just] sorcery!’ 14They denied them, in their wickedness
and their pride, even though their souls acknowledged them as true.See how those who spread corruption met their end!
15We gave knowledge to David and Solomon, and they both said,
‘Praise be to God, who has favoured us over many of His believing
servants.’ 16Solomon succeeded David. He said, ‘People, we have
been taught the speech of birds, and we have been given a share ofeverything: this is a clearly a great favour.’ 17Solomon’s hosts of jinn,
men, and birds were marshalled in ordered ranks before him, 18and
when they came to the Valley of the Ants, one ant said, ‘Ants! Gointo your homes, in case Solomon and his hosts unwittingly crushyou.’ 19Solomon smiled broadly at her words and said, ‘Lord, inspire
me to be thankful for the blessings You have granted me and myparents, and to do good deeds that please You; admit me by Yourgrace into the ranks of Your righteous servants.’
20Solomon inspected the birds and said, ‘Why do I not see the
hoopoe? Is he absent? 21I will punish him severely, or kill him, unless
he brings me a convincing excuse for his absence.’ 22But the hoopoe
did not stay away long: he came and said, ‘I have learned somethingyou did not know: I come to you from Sheba with ﬁrm news. 23I
found a woman ruling over the people, who has been given a share ofeverything– – she has a magni ﬁcent throne– –24[but] I found that she
and her people worshipped the sun instead of God. Satan has madetheir deeds seem alluring to them, and diverted them from the rightpath: they cannot ﬁnd the right path. 25Should they not worship
God, who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and earth andknows both what you people conceal and what you declare? 26He is
God, there is no god but Him, the Lord of the mighty throne.’27Solomon said, ‘We shall see whether you are telling the truth or
lying. 28Take this letter of mine and deliver it to them, then with-
draw and see what answer they send back.’
29The Queen of Sheba said, ‘Counsellors, a gracious letter has
been delivered to me. 30It is from Solomon, and it says, “In the name
of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy, 31do not put your-
selves above me, and come to me in submission to God.”’ 32She
said, ‘Counsellors, give me your counsel in the matter I now face: IThe Qur ᾿an 27:13 240only ever decide on matters in your presence.’ 33They replied, ‘We
possess great force and power in war, but you are in command, soconsider what orders to give us.’ 34She said, ‘Whenever kings go into
a city, they ruin it and humiliate its leaders– – that is what they do– –
35but I am going to send them a gift, then see what answer my envoys
bring back.’
36When her envoy came to Solomon, Solomon said, ‘What! Are
you o ﬀering me wealth? What God has given me is better than what
He has given you, though you rejoice in this gift of yours. 37Go back
to your people: we shall certainly come upon them with irresistible
forces, and drive them, disgraced and humbled, from their land.’38Then he said, ‘Counsellors, which of you can bring me her throne
before they come to me in submission?’ 39A powerful and crafty jinn
replied, ‘I will bring it to you before you can even rise from yourplace. I am strong and trustworthy enough,’ 40but one of them who
had some knowledge of the Scripture said, ‘I will bring it to you inthe twinkling of an eye.’
When Solomon saw it set before him, he said, ‘This is a favour
from my Lord, to test whether I am grateful or not: if anyone isgrateful, it is for his own good, if anyone is ungrateful, then my Lordis self-su ﬃcient and most generous.’ 41Then he said, ‘Disguise her
throne, and we shall see whether or not she recognizes it.’ 42When
she arrived, she was asked, ‘Is this your throne?’ She replied, ‘Itlooks like it.’ [Solomon said], ‘We were given knowledge before her,and we devoted ourselves to God; 43she was prevented by what she
worshipped instead of God, for she came from a disbelievingpeople.’ 44Then it was said to her, ‘Enter the hall,’ but when she saw
it, she thought it was a deep pool of water, and bared her legs.Solomon explained, ‘It is just a hall paved with glass,’ and she said,‘My Lord, I have wronged myself: I devote myself, with Solomon, toGod, the Lord of the Worlds.’
45To the people of Thamud We sent their brother, Salih, saying,
‘Worship God alone,’ but they split into two rival factions. 46Salih
said, ‘My people, why do you rush to bring [forward] what is bad
rather than good? Why do you not ask forgiveness of God, so that
you may be given mercy?’ 47They said, ‘We see you and your fol-
lowers as an evil omen.’ He replied, ‘God will decide on any omenyou may see: you people are being put to the test.’ 48There were nine
men in the city who spread corruption in the land without makingThe Ants
241 27:48amends. 49They said, ‘Swear by God: we shall attack this man and
his household in the night, then say to his next of kin, “We did notwitness the destruction of his household. We are telling the truth.”’50So they devised their evil plan, but We too made a plan of which
they were unaware. 51See how their scheming ended: We destroyed
them utterly, along with all their people. 52As a result of their evil
deeds, their homes are desolate ruins– – there truly is a sign in this for
those who know– –53but We saved those who believed and were
mindful of God.
54We also sent Lot to his people. He said to them, ‘How can you
commit this outrage with your eyes wide open? 55How can you lust
after men instead of women? What fools you are!’ 56The only answer
his people gave was to say, ‘Expel Lot’s followers from your town!These men mean to stay chaste!’ 57We saved him and his family– –
except for his wife: We made her stay behind– –58and We brought
rain down on them. How dreadful that rain was for those who hadbeen warned!
59Say [Prophet], ‘Praise be to God and peace on the servants He
has chosen.
a Who is better: God, or those they set up as partners
with Him? 60Who created the heavens and earth? Who sends down
water from the sky for you– – with which We cause gardens of delight
to grow: you have no power to make the trees grow in them– – is it
another god beside God? No! But they are people who take others tobe equal with God. 61Who is it that made the earth a stable place to
live? Who made rivers ﬂow through it? Who set immovable moun-
tains on it and created a barrier between the fresh and salt water? Is itanother god beside God? No! But most of them do not know. 62Who
is it that answers the distressed when they call upon Him? Whoremoves their su ﬀering? Who makes you successors in the earth? Is
it another god beside God? Little notice you take! 63Who is it that
guides you through the darkness on land and sea? Who sends thewinds as heralds of good news before His mercy?
b Is it another god
beside God? God is far above the partners they put beside him!64Who is it that creates life and reproduces it? Who is it that gives
you provision from the heavens and earth? Is it another god besideGod?’ Say, ‘Show me your evidence then, if what you say is true.’
aAs messengers, see e.g. 3:33.
bi.e. rain.The Qur ᾿an 27:49 24265Say, ‘No one in the heavens or on earth knows the unseen except
God.’ They do not know when they will be raised from the dead:66their knowledge cannot comprehend the Hereafter; they are in
doubt about it; they are blind to it. 67So the disbelievers say, ‘What!
When we and our forefathers have become dust, shall we be broughtback to life again? 68We have heard such promises before, and so did
our forefathers. These are just ancient fables.’ 69[Prophet], say,
‘Travel through the earth and see how the evildoers ended up.’
70[Prophet], do not grieve over them; do not be distressed by their
schemes. 71They also say, ‘When will this promise be ful ﬁlled if what
you say is true?’ 72Say, ‘Maybe some of what you seek to hasten is
near at hand.’ 73Your Lord is bountiful to people, though most of
them are ungrateful. 74He knows everything their hearts conceal and
everything they reveal: 75there is nothing hidden in the heavens or on
earth that is not in a clear Record.
76Truly, this Qur ᾿an explains to the Children of Israel most of
what they di ﬀer about, 77and it is guidance and grace for those who
believe. 78Truly, your Lord will judge between them in His wis-
dom– – He is the Almighty, the All Knowing– –79so [Prophet], put
your trust in God, you are on the path of clear truth. 80You cannot
make the dead hear, you cannot make the deaf listen to your callwhen they turn their backs and leave, 81you cannot guide the blind
out of their error: you cannot make anyone hear you except thosewho believe in Our signs and submit [to Us]. 82When the verdict is
given against them, We shall bring a creature out of the earth, whichwill tell them that people had no faith in Our revelations. 83The Day
will come when We gather from every community a crowd of thosewho disbelieved in Our signs and they will be led in separate groups84until, when they come before Him, He will say, ‘Did you deny
My messages without even taking them in? Or what were youdoing?’ 85The verdict will be given against them because of their
wrongdoing: they will not speak.
86Did they not see that We gave them the night for rest, and the
day for light? There truly are signs in this for those who believe.
87On the Day the Trumpet sounds, everyone in heaven and on earth
will be terri ﬁed–– except such as God wills– – and all will come to
Him in utter humility. 88You will see the mountains and think they
areﬁrmly ﬁxed, but they will ﬂoat away like clouds: this is the
handiwork of God who has perfected all things. He is fully aware ofThe Ants
243 27:88what you do: 89whoever comes with a good deed will be rewarded
with something better, and be secure from the terrors of that Day,90but whoever comes with evil deeds will be cast face downwards
into the Fire. ‘Are you rewarded for anything except what you havedone?’ 91[Say Prophet], ‘What I am commanded to do is to serve the
Sustainer of this town,
a which He has made inviolable. Everything
belongs to Him; I am commanded to be one of those devoted toHim; 92I am commanded to recite the Qur ᾿an.’ Whoever chooses to
follow the right path does so for his own good. Say to whoeverdeviates from it, ‘I am only here to warn.’ 93Say, ‘Praise belongs to
God: He will show you His signs so that you will recognize them.’Your Lord is never unmindful of what you all do.
aMecca.The Qur ᾿an 27:89 24428. THE STORY
A Meccan sura which centres on the story of Moses and takes its title from the
reference to the story told by Moses in verse 25. Its main theme is the bad end that
comes to those who are arrogant and spread corruption, like Pharaoh andQarun– –polytheism is denounced at various points throughout the sura– –and alink is made between these and the disbelievers of Mecca. The Prophet isreminded that he cannot make everyone believe (verse 56) and should remain
steadfast (verse 87).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Ta Sin Mim
2These are the verses of the Scripture that makes things clear: 3We
recount to you [Prophet] part of the story of Moses and Pharaoh,setting out the truth for people who believe. 4Pharaoh made himself
high and mighty in the land and divided the people into di ﬀerent
groups: one group he oppressed, slaughtering their sons and sparingtheir women– –he was one of those who spread corruption– – 5but We
wished to favour those who were oppressed in that land, to makethem leaders, the ones to survive, 6to establish them in the land, and
through them show Pharaoh, Haman, and their armies the verything they feared.
7We inspired Moses’ mother, saying, ‘Suckle him, and then, when
you fear for his safety, put him in the river: do not be afraid, and donot grieve, for We shall return him to you and make him a messen-
ger.’ 8Pharaoh’s household picked him up– –later to
a become an
enemy and a source of grief for them: Pharaoh, Haman, and theirarmies were wrongdoers– – 9and Pharaoh’s wife said, ‘Here is a joy to
behold for me and for you! Do not kill him: he may be of use to us, orwe may adopt him as a son.’ They did not realize what they weredoing. 10The next day, Moses’ mother felt a void in her heart– –if We
had not strengthened it to make her one of those who believe, she
would have revealed everything about him– – 11and she said to his
sister, ‘Follow him.’ So she watched him from a distance, without
aLi here indicates consequence rather than purpose.them knowing. 12We had ordained that he would refuse to feed from
wet nurses. His sister approached them and said, ‘Shall I tell youabout a household which could bring him up for you and take goodcare of him?’ 13We restored him to his mother in this way, so that she
might be comforted, not grieve, and know that God’s promise istrue, though most of them do not know.
14When Moses reached full maturity and manhood, We gave him
wisdom and knowledge: this is how We reward those who do good.
15He entered the city, unnoticed by its people, and found two men
ﬁghting: one from his own people, the other an enemy. The one
from his own people cried out to him for help against the enemy.Moses struck him with his ﬁst and killed him. He said, ‘This must be
Satan’s work: clearly he is a misleading enemy.’ 16He said, ‘Lord, I
have wronged myself. Forgive me,’ so He forgave him; He is trulythe Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful. 17He said, ‘My Lord,
because of the blessings You have bestowed upon me, I shall neversupport those who do evil.’
18Next morning, he was walking in the city, fearful and vigilant,
when suddenly the man he had helped the day before cried out tohim for help. Moses said, ‘You are clearly a troublemaker.’ 19As he
was about to attack the man who was an enemy to both of them, theman said, ‘Moses, are you going to kill me as you killed that personyesterday? You clearly want to be a tyrant in the land; you do notintend to put things right.’ 20Then a man came running from the
furthest part of the city and said, ‘Moses, the authorities are talkingabout killing you, so leave– – this is my sincere advice.’ 21So Moses
left the city, fearful and wary, and prayed, ‘My Lord, save me frompeople who do wrong.’
22As he made his way towards Midian, he was saying, ‘May my
Lord guide me to the right way.’ 23When he arrived at Midian’s
waters, he found a group of men watering [their ﬂocks], and beside
them two women keeping their ﬂocks back, so he said, ‘What is the
matter with you two?’ They said, ‘We cannot water [our ﬂocks] until
the shepherds take their sheep away: our father is a very old man.’24He watered their ﬂocks for them, withdrew into the shade, and
prayed, ‘My Lord, I am in dire need of whatever good thing Youmay send me,’ 25and then one of the two women approached him,
walking shyly, and said, ‘My father is asking for you: he wants toreward you for watering our ﬂocks for us.’The Qur ᾿an 28:12 246When Moses came to him and told him his story, the old man said,
‘Do not be afraid, you are safe now from people who do wrong.’26One of the women said, ‘Father, hire him: a strong, trustworthy
man is the best to hire.’ 27The father said, ‘I would like to marry you
to one of these daughters of mine, on condition that you serve me foreight years: if you complete ten, it will be of your own free will. I donot intend to make things di ﬃcult for you: God willing, you will ﬁnd
I am a fair man.’ 28Moses said, ‘Let that be the agreement between
us–– whichever of the two terms I ful ﬁl, let there be no injustice to
me–– God is witness to what we say.’
29Once Moses had ful ﬁlled the term and was travelling with his
family, he caught sight of a ﬁre on the side of the mountain and
said to his family, ‘Wait! I have seen a ﬁre. I will bring you news
from there, or a burning stick for you to warm yourselves.’ 30But
when he reached it, a voice called out to him from the right-handside of the valley, from a tree on the blessed ground: ‘Moses, I amGod, the Lord of the Worlds. 31Throw down your sta ﬀ.’ When he
saw his sta ﬀ moving like a snake, he ﬂed in fear and would not
return. Again [he was called]: ‘Moses! Draw near! Do not beafraid, for you are one of those who are safe. 32Put your hand
inside your shirt and it will come out white but unharmed– – hold
your arm close to your side, free from all fear. These shall be two
signs from your Lord to Pharaoh and his chiefs; they are trulywicked people.’ 33Moses said, ‘My Lord, I killed one of their men,
and I fear that they may kill me. 34My brother Aaron is more
eloquent than I: send him with me to help me and con ﬁrm my
words– – I fear they may call me a liar.’ 35God said, ‘We shall
strengthen you through your brother; We shall give you both powerso that they cannot touch you. With Our signs you, and those whofollow you, will triumph.’
36But when Moses came to them with Our clear signs, they said,
‘These are mere conjuring tricks; we never heard this from ourforefathers.’ 37Moses said, ‘My Lord knows best who comes with
guidance from Him and who will have the ﬁnal Home: wrongdoers
will never succeed.’ 38Pharaoh said, ‘Counsellors, you have no other
god that I know of except me. Haman, light me a ﬁre to bake clay
bricks, then build me a tall building so that I may climb up toMoses’ God: I am convinced that he is lying.’
39Pharaoh and his armies behaved arrogantly in the land with noThe Story
247 28:39right– – they thought they would not be brought back to Us– –40so We
seized him and his armies and threw them into the sea. See whatbecame of the wrongdoers! 41We made them leaders calling [others]
only to the Fire: on the Day of Resurrection they will not be helped.42We made Our rejection pursue them in this world, and on the Day
of Resurrection they will be among the despised. 43After We had
destroyed the earlier generations, We gave Moses the Scripture to
provide insight, guidance, and mercy for people, so that they mighttake heed.
44You [Muhammad] were not present on the western side of the
mountain when We gave Our command to Moses: you were notthere– –45We have brought into being many generations who lived
long lives– – you did not live among the people of Midian or recite
Our Revelation to them– – We have always sent messengers to
people– – 46nor were you present on the side of Mount Sinai when
We called out to Moses. But you too have been sent as an act of gracefrom your Lord, to give warning to a people to whom no warner hascome before, so that they may take heed, 47and may not say, if a
disaster should befall them as a result of what they have done withtheir own hands, ‘Lord, if only You had sent us a messenger, wemight have followed Your message and become believers.’ 48Even
now that Our truth has come to them, they say, ‘Why has he not been
given signs like those given to Moses?’ Did they not also deny thetruth that was given to Moses before? They say, ‘Two kinds of sor-cery, helping each other,’ and, ‘We refuse to accept either of them.’49Say [Muhammad], ‘Then produce a book from God that gives
better guidance than these two and I will follow it, if you are tellingthe truth.’ 50If they do not respond to you, you will know that they
follow only their own desires. Who is further astray than the onewho follows his own desires with no guidance from God? Truly Goddoes not guide those who do wrong.
51We have caused Our Word to come to them so that they may be
mindful. 52Those to whom We gave the Scripture before believe in
it,
a53and, when it is recited to them, say, ‘We believe in it, it is the
truth from our Lord. Before it came we had already devoted our-selves to Him.’ 54They will be given their rewards twice over because
they are steadfast, repel evil with good, give to others out of what
aThe Qur ᾿an.The Qur ᾿an 28:40 248We have provided for them, 55and turn away whenever they hear
frivolous talk, saying, ‘We have our deeds and you have yours. Peacebe with you! We do not seek the company of ignorant people.’
56You [Prophet] cannot guide everyone you love to the truth; it is
God who guides whoever He will: He knows best those who willfollow guidance. 57They say, ‘If we were to follow guidance with you
[Prophet], we would be swept from our land.’ Have We not estab-
lished for them a secure sanctuary
a where every kind of produce is
brought, as a provision from Us? But most of them do not compre-
hend. 58We have destroyed many a community that once revelled in
its wanton wealth and easy living: since then their dwelling places
have barely been inhabited– – We are the only heir. 59Your Lord
would never destroy towns without ﬁrst raising a messenger in their
midst to recite Our messages to them, nor would We destroy townsunless their inhabitants were evildoers. 60Whatever things you
have been given for the life of this world are merely [temporary]gratiﬁcation and vanity: that which is with God is better and more
lasting– – will you not use your reason?
61Can the person who will see the ful ﬁlment of the good promise
We gave him be compared to someone We have given some enjoy-ments for this worldly life but who, on the Day of Resurrection, willbe summoned?
b62The Day will come when God will call them,
saying, ‘Where now are those you allege are My partners?’ 63and
those [ringleaders] against whom the verdict will be passed will say,‘Our Lord, these are the ones we caused to deviate. We caused themto deviate as we ourselves deviated, but now we disown them beforeYou: they did not really serve us.’ 64It will then be said to them,
‘Now call those you worshipped as partners,’ and they will call them
but receive no answer. They will see the su ﬀering and wish they had
followed guidance. 65On that Day He will call them, saying, ‘How
did you respond to My messengers?’ 66All arguments will seem
obscure to them on that Day; they will not be able to consult one
another. 67Yet anyone who has repented, believed, and done good
deeds can hope to ﬁnd himself among the successful. 68Your Lord
creates what He pleases and chooses those He will– – they have no
choice– – so glory be to God, and may He be exalted above the
partners they ascribe to Him! 69Your Lord knows what their hearts
aMecca.bFor punishment.The Story 249 28:69conceal and what they reveal. 70He is God; there is no god but Him;
all praise belongs to Him in this world and the next; His is theJudgement; and to Him you shall be returned.
71Say [Prophet], ‘Just think, if God were to cast perpetual night
over you until the Day of Resurrection, what god other than Hecould bring you light? Do you not listen?’ 72Say, ‘Just think, if God
were to cast perpetual day over you until the Day of Resurrection,
what god other than He could give you night in which to rest? Do
you not see? 73In His mercy He has given you night and day, so that
you may rest and seek His bounty and be grateful.’ 74The Day will
come when He will call out to them, saying, ‘Where are the partnersyou claimed for Me?’ 75We shall call a witness from every com-
munity, and say, ‘Produce your evidence,’ and then they will knowthat truth belongs to God alone; the gods they invented will forsakethem.
76Qarun was one of Moses’ people, but he oppressed them. We
had given him such treasures that even their keys would haveweighed down a whole company of strong men. His people said tohim, ‘Do not gloat, for God does not like people who gloat. 77Seek
the life to come by means of what God has granted you, but do notneglect your rightful share in this world. Do good to others as Godhas done good to you. Do not seek to spread corruption in the land,for God does not love those who do this,’ 78but he answered, ‘This
wealth was given to me on account of the knowledge I possess.’ Didhe not know that God had destroyed many generations before him,who had greater power than him and built up greater wealth? Theguilty will not be questioned about their sins.
a79He went out
among his people in all his pomp, and those whose aim was the life of
this world said, ‘If only we had been given something like whatQarun has been given: he really is a very fortunate man,’ 80but those
who were given knowledge said, ‘Alas for you! God’s reward is betterfor those who believe and do good deeds: only those who are stead-fast will attain this.’ 81We caused the earth to swallow him and his
home: he had no one to help him against God, nor could he defendhimself. 82The next day, those who had, the day before, wished to be
aThere are a number of interpretations of this verse, the most likely, according to
Razi, being that the guilty will not be granted the privilege of being questioned abouttheir sins, nor will they be given the opportunity to provide excuses.The Qur ᾿an 28:70 250in his place exclaimed, ‘Alas [for you, Qarun]! It is God alone who
gives what He will, abundantly or sparingly, to whichever He will ofHis creatures: if God had not been gracious to us, He would havecaused the earth to swallow us too.’ Alas indeed! Those who deny thetruth will never prosper.
83We grant the Home in the Hereafter to those who do not seek
superiority on earth or spread corruption: the happy ending is
awarded to those who are mindful of God. 84Whoever comes before
God with a good deed will receive a better reward; whoever comeswith an evil deed will be punished only for what he has done. 85He
who has made the Qur ᾿an binding on you [Prophet] will bring you
back home.
a So say, ‘My Lord knows best who has brought true
guidance and who is blatantly astray.’ 86You yourself could not have
expected the Scripture to be sent to you; it came only as a mercyfrom your Lord. So give no help to the disbelievers. 87Do not let
them turn you away from God’s revelations after they have beenrevealed to you. Call people to your Lord. Never become one ofthose who ascribe partners to God. 88Do not call out to any other god
beside God, for there is no god but Him. Everything will perishexcept His Face. His is the Judgement and to Him you shall all bebrought back.
aTo Him. Cf. verse 83. Various commentators take this to refer to Mecca or to the life
to come.The Story 251 28:8829. THE SPIDER
A Meccan sura that takes its title from the illustration of the spider in
verse 41. The sura stresses that believers will be tested and that they should
remain steadfast. The misconceptions of disbelievers regarding the nature ofrevelation and the Prophet are addressed. References are made to earlierprophets and details given of the punishments brought on those who deniedthem.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Alif Lam Mim
2Do people think they will be left alone after saying ‘We believe’
without being put to the test? 3We tested those who went before
them: God will certainly mark out which ones are truthful andwhich are lying. 4Do the evildoers think they can escape us? How
ill they judge! 5But as for those who strive for their meeting with
God, God’s appointed time is bound to come; He is the All Seeing,the All Knowing. 6Those who exert themselves do so for their own
beneﬁt– –God does not need His creatures– – 7We shall certainly blot
out the misdeeds of those who believe and do good deeds, and We
shall reward them according to the best of their actions. 8We have
commanded people to be good to their parents, but do not obey themif they strive to make you serve, beside Me, anything of which youhave no knowledge: you will all return to Me, and I shall inform youof what you have done. 9We shall be sure to admit those who believe
and do good deeds to the ranks of the righteous.
10There are some people who say, ‘We believe in God,’ but, when
they su ﬀer for His cause, they think that human persecution is as
severe as God’s punishment– –yet, if any help comes to you[Prophet] from your Lord, they will say, ‘We have always been withyou’. Does God not know best what is in everyone’s hearts? 11God
will be sure to mark out which ones are the believers, and which thehypocrites. 12Those who disbelieve say to the believers, ‘Follow our
path and we shall bear [the consequences for] your sins,’ yet they willnot do so– –they are liars. 13They will bear their own burdens andothers besides: they will be questioned about their false assertions on
the Day of Resurrection.
14We sent Noah out to his people. He lived among them for ﬁfty
years short of a thousand but when the Flood overwhelmed themthey were still doing evil. 15We saved him and those with him on the
Ark. We made this a sign for all people.
16We also sent Abraham. He said to his people, ‘Serve God and be
mindful of Him: that is better for you, if only you knew. 17What you
worship instead of God are mere idols; what you invent is nothing
but falsehood. Those you serve instead of God have no power to give
you provisions, so seek provisions from God, serve Him, and giveHim thanks: you will all be returned to Him. 18If you say this is a lie,
[be warned that] other communities before you said the same. The
messenger’s only duty is to give clear warning.’
19Do they not see that God brings life into being and reproduces
it? Truly this is easy for God. 20Say, ‘Travel throughout the earth
and see how He brings life into being: and He will bring the next lifeinto being. God has power over all things. 21He punishes whoever
He will and shows mercy to whoever He will. You will all bereturned to Him. 22You cannot escape Him on earth or in the
heavens; you will have no one to protect or help you besides God.’
23Those who deny God’s Revelation and their meeting with Him
have no hope of receiving My grace: they will have a grievoustorment.
24The only answer Abraham’s people gave was, ‘Kill him or burn
him!’ but God saved him from the Fire: there truly are signs in thisfor people who believe. 25Abraham said to them, ‘You have chosen
idols instead of God but your love for them will only last for thepresent life: on the Day of Resurrection, you will disown and rejectone another. Hell will be your home and no one will help you.’ 26Lot
believed him, and said, ‘I will ﬂee to my Lord: He is the Almighty,
the All Wise.’ 27We gave Isaac and Jacob to Abraham, and placed
prophethood and Scripture among his o ﬀspring. We gave him his
rewards in this world, and in the life to come he will be among the
righteous.
28And Lot: when He said to his people, ‘You practise outrageous
acts that no people before you have ever committed. 29How can you
lust after men, waylay travellers, and commit evil in your gather-ings?’ the only answer his people gave was, ‘Bring God’s punishmentThe Spider
253 29:29down on us, if what you say is true.’ 30So he prayed, ‘My Lord, help
me against these people who spread corruption.’ 31When Our mes-
sengers brought the good news [of the birth of a son] to Abraham,a
they told him, ‘We are about to destroy the people of that town.They are wrongdoers.’ 32Abraham said, ‘But Lot lives there.’ They
answered, ‘We know who lives there better than you do. We shall savehim and his household, except for his wife: she will be one of thosewho stay behind.’ 33When Our messengers came to Lot, he was
troubled and distressed on their account. They said, ‘Have no fear orgrief: we shall certainly save you and your household, except for yourwife– – she will be one of those who stay behind– –34and we shall send
a punishment from heaven down on the people of this town because
they violate [God’s order].’ 35We left some [of the town] there as a
clear sign for those who use their reason.
36To the people of Midian We sent their brother Shu ῾ayb. He said,
‘My people, serve God and think ahead to the Last Day. Do notcommit evil and spread corruption in the land.’ 37They rejected him
and so the earthquake overtook them. When morning came, they
were lying dead in their homes. 38[Remember] the tribes of ῾Ad and
Thamud: their history is made clear to you by [what is left of] theirdwelling places. Satan made their foul deeds seem alluring to them
and barred them from the right way, though they were capable ofseeing. 39[Remember] Qarun and Pharaoh and Haman: Moses
brought them clear signs, but they behaved arrogantly on earth.
They could not escape Us 40and We punished each one of them for
their sins: some We struck with a violent storm; some were overcomeby a sudden blast; some We made the earth swallow; and some We
drowned. It was not God who wronged them; they wronged them-selves. 41Those who take protectors other than God can be com-
pared to spiders building themselves houses– – the spider’s is the
frailest of all houses– – if only they could understand. 42God knows
what things they call upon beside Him: He is the Mighty, the Wise.43Such are the comparisons We draw for people, though only the
wise can grasp them. 44God has created the heavens and earth for a
true purpose. There truly is a sign in this for those who believe.
45[Prophet], recite what has been revealed to you of the Scripture;
keep up the prayer: prayer restrains outrageous and unacceptable
aCf. e.g. 51:28.The Qur ᾿an 29:30 254behaviour. Remembering God is greater: God knows everything you
are doing. 46[Believers], argue only in the best way with the People of
the Book, except with those of them who act unjustly. Say, ‘Webelieve in what was revealed to us and in what was revealed to you;our God and your God are one [and the same]; we are devoted toHim.’ 47This is the way We sent the Scripture to you [Muhammad].
Those to whom We had already given Scripture
a believe in [the
Qur ᾿an] and so do some of these people. No one refuses to
acknowledge Our revelations but the de ﬁant.
48You never recited any Scripture before We revealed this one to
you; you never wrote one down with your hand. If you had done so,those who follow falsehood might have had cause to doubt. 49But no,
[this Qur ᾿an] is a revelation that is clear to the hearts of those
endowed with knowledge. No one refuses to acknowledge Our rev-elations but the evildoers. 50They say, ‘Why have no miracles been
sent to him by his Lord?’ Say, ‘Miracles lie in God’s hands; I am
simply here to warn you plainly.’ 51Do they not think it is enough
that We have sent down to you the Scripture that is recited to them?There is a mercy in this and a lesson for believing people. 52Say,
‘God is su ﬃcient witness between me and you: He knows what is in
the heavens and earth. Those who believe in false deities and denyGod will be the losers.’
53They challenge you to hasten the punishment: they would
already have received a punishment if God had not set a time for it,and indeed it will come to them suddenly and catch them unawares.54They challenge you to hasten the punishment: Hell will encompass
all those who deny the truth, 55on the Day when punishment over-
whelms them from above and from below their very feet, and theywill be told, ‘Now taste the punishment for what you used to do.’
56My believing servants! My earth is vast, so worship Me and Me
alone. 57Every soul will taste death, then it is to Us that you will be
returned. 58We shall lodge those who believed and did good deeds
in lofty dwellings, in the Garden graced with ﬂowing streams, there
to remain. How excellent is the reward of those who labour,
59those who are steadfast, those who put their trust in their Lord!
60How many are the creatures who do not store their sustenance!
aAccording to some commentators this refers to those Jews and Christians at the
time of the Prophet who believed in him.The Spider 255 29:60God sustains them and you: He alone is the All Hearing, the All
Knowing. 61If you ask the disbelievers who created the heavens and
earth and who harnessed the sun and moon, they are sure to say,‘God.’ Then why do they turn away from Him? 62It is God who
gives abundantly to whichever of His servants He will, and sparinglyto whichever He will: He has full knowledge of everything. 63If you
ask them, ‘Who sends water down from the sky and gives life with it
to the earth after it has died?’ they are sure to say, ‘God.’ Say, ‘Praisebelongs to God!’ Truly, most of them do not use their reason.
64The life of this world is merely an amusement and a diversion;
the true life is in the Hereafter, if only they knew. 65Whenever they
go on board a ship they call on God, and dedicate their faith to Him
alone, but once He has delivered them safely back to land, see how
they ascribe partners to Him! 66Let them show their ingratitude for
what We have given them; let them take their enjoyment– – soon they
will know. 67Can they not see that We have made [them] a secure
sanctuary
a though all around them people are snatched away? Then
how can they believe in what is false and deny God’s blessing? 68Who
could be more wicked than the person who invents lies about God,or denies the truth when it comes to him? Is Hell not the home forthe disbelievers? 69But We shall be sure to guide to Our ways those
who strive hard for Our cause: God is with those who do good.
aMecca.The Qur ᾿an 29:61 25630. THE BYZANTINES
A Meccan sura which opens with a reference to the defeat of the Byzantines at
the hands of the Persians ( 613–14ce) in Syria, and the subsequent victory of
the Byzantines in 624ce. The sura urges people to re ﬂect on the creation of
themselves, the heavens and earth, and all God’s wonders. God’s power to givelife to a barren land is repeated as an indication both of His ability to raise thedead and of His mercy to mankind. The disbelievers are warned to believebefore it is too late; the Prophet is urged to persevere and to ignore the taunts ofthe disbelievers.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Alif Lam Mim
2The Byzantines have been defeated 3in a nearby land. They will
reverse their defeat with a victory 4in a few years’ timea– –God is in
command, ﬁrst and last. On that day, the believers will rejoice 5at
God’s help. He helps whoever He pleases: He is the Mighty, theMerciful. 6This is God’s promise: God never breaks His promise,
but most people do not know; 7they only know the outer surface of
this present life and are heedless of the life to come. 8Have they not
thought about their own selves?
b God did not create the heavens and
earth and everything between them without a serious purpose and anappointed time, yet many people deny that they will meet their Lord.
9Have they not travelled through the land and seen how their
predecessors met their end? They were mightier than them: theycultivated the earth more and built more upon it. Their own mes-sengers also came to them with clear signs: God did not wrongthem; they wronged themselves. 10Later the evildoers met a terrible
end for rejecting and [repeatedly] mocking God’s revelations. 11God
brings creation into being; in the end He will reproduce it and it is toHim you will be recalled.
12On the Day the Hour arrives, the guilty will despair 13and they
will have no intercessors among those partners they ascribed to
aWhen fortunes were reversed and the Byzantines won a victory, this was to please
the believers. This was also the year of the Muslim victory at Badr. The earlier defeat ofthe Byzantines had been viewed by the Meccan pagans as a victory for paganism.
bOr ‘within’ themselves. See also 41:53.God– – they will deny these partners. 14When the Hour arrives, on
that Day people will be separated: 15those who believed and did good
deeds will delight in a Garden, 16while those who disbelieved and
denied Our messages and the meeting of the Hereafter will bebrought for punishment.
17So celebrate God’s glory in the evening, in the morning– –
18praise is due to Him in the heavens and the earth– – in the late
afternoon, and at midday. 19He brings the living out of the dead and
the dead out of the living. He gives life to the earth after death, and
you will be brought out in the same way. 20One of His signs is that
He created you from dust and– – lo and behold!– – you became human
and scattered far and wide. 21Another of His signs is that He created
spouses from among yourselves for you to live with in tranquillity:
He ordained love and kindness between you. There truly are signs inthis for those who re ﬂect. 22Another of His signs is the creation of the
heavens and earth, and the diversity of your languages and colours.There truly are signs in this for those who know. 23Among His signs
are your sleep, by night and by day, and your seeking His bounty.There truly are signs in this for those who can hear. 24Among His
signs, too, are that He shows you the lightning that terri ﬁes and
inspires hope; that He sends water down from the sky to restore the
earth to life after death. There truly are signs in this for those who
use their reason. 25Among His signs, too, is the fact that the heavens
and the earth stand ﬁrm by His command. In the end, you will all
emerge when He calls you from the earth. 26Everyone in the heavens
and earth belongs to Him, and all are obedient to Him. 27He is the
One who originates creation and will do it again– – this is even easier
for Him. He is above all comparison in the heavens and earth; He isthe Almighty, the All Wise.
28He gives you this example, drawn from your own lives: do you
make your slaves full partners with an equal share in what We havegiven you? Do you fear them as you fear each other? This is howWe make Our messages clear to those who use their reason. 29And
still the idolaters follow their own desires without any knowledge.
Who can guide those God leaves to stray, who have no one to help
them? 30So [Prophet] as a man of pure faith, stand ﬁrm and true in
your devotion to
a the religion. This is the natural disposition God
aLiterally ‘set your face to’.The Qur ᾿an 30:14 258instilled in mankind– – there is no altering God’s creation– – and this
is the right religion, though most people do not realize it. 31Turn
to Him alone, all of you. Be mindful of Him; keep up the prayer;do not join those who ascribe partners to God, 32those who divide
their religion into sects, with each party rejoicing in their own.33When something bad happens to people, they cry to their Lord
and turn to Him for help, but no sooner does He let them taste His
blessing than– – lo and behold!– – some of them ascribe partners to
their Lord, 34showing no gratitude for what We have given them.
‘Take your pleasure! You will come to know.’ 35Did We send them
down any authority that sanctions the partners they ascribe toGod?
36When We give people a taste of Our blessing, they rejoice, but
when something bad happens to them– – because of their own
actions– – they fall into utter despair. 37Do they not see that God
gives abundantly to whoever He will and sparingly [to whoever Hewill]? There truly are signs in this for those who believe. 38So give
their due to the near relative, the needy, and the wayfarer– – that is
best for those whose goal is God’s approval:
a these are the ones who
will prosper. 39Whatever you lend out in usury to gain value through
other people’s wealth will not increase in God’s eyes, but whateveryou give in charity, in your desire for God’s approval, will earnmultiple rewards. 40It is God who created you and provided for you,
who will cause you to die and then give you life again. Which ofyour ‘partners’ can do any one of these things? Glory be to God, andexalted be He above the partners they attribute to Him. 41Corrup-
tion has ﬂourished on land and sea as a result of people’s actions and
He will make them taste the consequences of some of their ownactions so that they may turn back. 42Say, ‘Travel through the land,
and see how those before you met their end– – most of them were
idolaters.’ 43[Prophet], stand ﬁrm in your devotion to the upright
religion, before an irresistible Day comes from God. On that Day,mankind will be divided: 44those who rejected the truth will bear the
burden of that rejection, and those who did good deeds will have
made good provision for themselves. 45From His bounty God will
reward those who believe and do good deeds; He does not like thosewho reject the truth.
aLiterally ‘face’.The Byzantines 259 30:4546Another of His signs is that He sends out the winds bearing
good news, giving you a taste of His grace, making the ships sail atHis command, enabling you to [journey in] search of His bounty sothat you may be grateful. 47Before you [Muhammad], We sent mes-
sengers, each to their own people: they brought them clear proofsand then We punished the evildoers. We make it Our duty to helpthe believers. 48It is God who sends out the winds; they stir up the
clouds; He spreads them over the skies as He pleases; He makesthem break up and you see the rain falling from them. See how they
rejoice when He makes it fall upon whichever of His servants He
wishes, 49though before it is sent they may have lost all hope. 50Look,
then, at the imprints of God’s mercy, how He restores the earth to
life after death: this same God is the one who will return people to
life after death– – He has power over all things. 51Yet they will con-
tinue in their disbelief, even if We send a [scorching] wind and theysee their crops turn yellow. 52You [Prophet] cannot make the dead
hear and you cannot make the deaf hear your call when they turntheir backs and leave; 53you cannot lead the blind out of their error:
the only ones you can make hear you are those who believe in Ourrevelations and devote themselves [to Us]. 54It is God who creates
you weak, then gives you strength, then weakness after strength,
together with your grey hair: He creates what He will; He is the All
Knowing, the All Powerful.
55On the Day the Hour comes, the guilty will swear they lingered
no more than an hour– – they have always been deluded– –56but those
endowed with knowledge and faith will say, ‘In accordance withGod’s decree, you actually lingered till the Day of Resurrection: thisis the Day of Resurrection, yet you did not know.’ 57On that Day the
evildoers’ excuses will be of no use to them: they will not be allowedto make amends.
58In this Qur ᾿an We have set every kind of illustration before
people, yet if you [Prophet] brought them a miracle, the disbelieverswould still say, ‘You [prophets] deal only in falsehood.’ 59In this
way God seals the hearts of those who do not know, 60so be patient,
for God’s promise is true: do not let those with no ﬁrm beliefs
discourage you.The Qur ᾿an 260 30 :4631. LUQMAN
A Meccan sura that takes its title from Luqman the Wise, whose counsel to his
son is related in verses 13–19. The sura opens with a description of the
believers, and it condemns those who attempt to lead others away from guid-ance. It extols God’s power and warns the disbelievers of the consequences oftheir actions. The Prophet is told not to be saddened by their disbelief.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Alif Lam Mim
2These are the verses of the wise Scripture, 3[with] guidance and
mercy for those who do good, 4who keep up the prayer, pay the
prescribed alms, and are certain of the Hereafter: 5these are rightly
guided by their Lord, and it is they who will prosper. 6But there is
the sort of person who pays for distracting tales, intending, withoutany knowledge, to lead others from God’s way, and to hold it up toridicule.
a There will be humiliating torment for him! 7When Our
verses are recited to him, he turns away disdainfully as if he had notheard them, as if there were heaviness in his ears. Tell him that there
will be a painful torment! 8But for those who believe and do right-
eous deeds, there will be Gardens of bliss 9where they will stay: that
is God’s true promise, and He is the Almighty, the All Wise. 10He
created the heavens without any visible support, and He placed ﬁrm
mountains on the earth– –in case it should shake under you– –and Hespread all kinds of animals around it. We sent down water from thesky, with which We made every kind of good plant grow on earth:11all this is God’s creation. Now, show Me what your other gods
have created. No, the disbelievers are clearly astray.
12We endowed Luqman with wisdom: ‘Be thankful to God:
whoever gives thanks bene ﬁts his own soul, and as for those
who are thankless– –God is self-su ﬃcient, worthy of all praise.’
13Luqman counselled his son, ‘My son, do not attribute any partners
to God: attributing partners to Him is a terrible wrong.’
aUnderstood to refer to al-Nadr ibn al-Harith, who bought some ancient Persian
stories to distract the people of Quraysh from listening to the Qur ᾿an.14We have commanded people to be good to their parents: their
mothers carried them, with strain upon strain, and it takes two yearsto wean them. Give thanks to Me and to your parents– – all will
return to Me. 15If they strive to make you associate with Me any-
thing about which you have no knowledge,
a then do not obey them.
Yet keep their company in this life according to what is right, andfollow the path of those who turn to Me. You will all return to Me inthe end, and I will tell you everything that you have done.
16[And Luqman continued], ‘My son, if even the weight of a
mustard seed were hidden in a rock or anywhere in the heavens orearth, God would bring it [to light], for He is all subtle and all aware.17Keep up the prayer, my son; command what is right; forbid what is
wrong; bear anything that happens to you steadfastly: these arethings to be aspired to. 18Do not turn your nose up at people, nor
walk about the place arrogantly, for God does not love arrogant orboastful people. 19Go at a moderate pace and lower your voice, for
the ugliest of all voices is the braying of asses.’
20[People], do you not see how God has made what is in the
heavens and on the earth useful to you, and has lavished His bless-ings on you both outwardly and inwardly? Yet some people argueabout God, without knowledge or guidance or an illuminating scrip-ture. 21When they are told, ‘Follow what God has sent down,’ they
say: ‘We shall follow what we saw our forefathers following.’ What!Even if Satan is calling them to the su ﬀering of the Blazing Flame?
22Whoever directs himself
b wholly to God and does good work has
grasped the surest handhold, for the outcome of everything is withGod. 23As for those who refuse to do this, do not let their refusal
sadden you [Prophet]– – they will return to Us and We shall tell them
what they have done: God knows all that hearts contain– –24We let
them enjoy themselves for a little while, but We shall drive them toa harsh torment. 25If you ask them who created the heavens and
earth, they are sure to say, ‘God.’ Say, ‘Praise belongs to God,’ butmost of them do not understand. 26Everything in the heavens and
earth belongs to God. God is self-su ﬃcient and worthy of all praise.
27If all the trees on earth were pens and all the seas, with seven more
seas besides, [were ink,] still God’s words would not run out: God isalmighty and all wise. 28Creating and resurrecting all of you is only
ai.e. scriptural proof.bLiterally ‘his face’.The Qur ᾿an 31:14 262like creating or resurrecting a single soul: God is all hearing and all
seeing.
29[Prophet], do you not see that God causes the night to merge
into day and the day to merge into night; that He has subjected thesun and the moon, each to run its course for a stated term; that He isaware of everything you [people] do? 30This is because God is the
Truth, and what they invoke beside Him is false. He is the Most
High, Most Great. 31[Prophet], do you not see that ships sail
through the sea, by the grace of God, to show you [people] some ofHis wonders? Truly there are signs in this for every steadfast, thank-ful person. 32When the waves loom over those on board like giant
shadows they call out to God, devoting their religion entirely toHim. But, when He has delivered them safely to land, some of themwaver– – only a treacherous, thankless person refuses to acknowledge
Our signs. 33People, be mindful of your Lord and fear a day when no
parent will take the place of their child, nor a child take the place oftheir parent, in any way. God’s promise is true, so do not let thepresent life delude you, nor let the Deceiver delude you about God.34Knowledge of the Hour [of Resurrection] belongs to God; it is He
who sends down the relieving rain and He who knows what is hiddenin the womb. No soul knows what it will reap tomorrow, and no soulknows in what land it will die; it is God who is all knowing andall aware.Luqman
263 31:3432. BOWING DOWN IN WORSHIP
A Meccan sura which takes its title from the bowing down of true believers in
worship in verse 15. The truth of the Qur ᾿an is emphasized at the beginning of
the sura, and the Prophet is urged at the end of the sura to pay no attention tothe disbelievers who cannot see the signi ﬁcance of God’s signs.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Alif Lam Mim
2This scripture, free from all doubt, has been sent down from the
Lord of the Worlds. 3Yet they say, ‘Muhammad has made it up.’ No
indeed! It is the Truth from your Lord for you [Prophet], to warn apeople who have had no one to warn them before, so that they maybe guided. 4It is God who created the heavens and the earth and
everything between them in six Days. Then He established Himselfon the Throne. You [people] have no one but Him to protect you and
no one to intercede for you, so why do you not take heed? 5He runs
everything, from the heavens to the earth, and everything will ascendto Him in the end, on a Day that will measure a thousand years inyour reckoning. 6Such is He who knows all that is unseen as well as
what is seen, the Almighty, the Merciful, 7who gave everything its
perfect form. He ﬁrst created man from clay, 8then made his des-
cendants from an extract of underrated ﬂuid.
a9Then He moulded
him; He breathed from His Spirit into him; He gave you hearing,sight, and minds. How seldom you are grateful! 10They say, ‘What?
When we have disappeared into the earth, shall we really be createdanew?’ In fact, they deny the meeting with their Lord. 11Say, ‘The
Angel of Death put in charge of you will reclaim you, and then youwill be brought back to your Lord.’
12[Prophet], if only you could see the wrongdoers hang their
heads before their Lord: ‘Our Lord, now that we have seen andheard, send us back and we shall do good. [Now] we are convinced.’
13‘If it had been Our will, We could certainly have given every soul
its true guidance, but My words have come true. “I shall be sure to
aSemen.ﬁll Hell with jinn and men together.” 14So since you ignored the
meeting on this Day of yours, now We shall ignore you: taste thelasting su ﬀering for all you have done.’
15The only people who truly believe in Our messages are those
who, when they are reminded of them, bow down in worship, cele-brate their Lord’s praises, and do not think themselves above this.16Their sides shun their beds in order to pray to their Lord in fear
and hope; they give to others some of what We have given them.17No soul knows what joy is kept hidden in store for them as a
reward for what they have done. 18So, is someone who believes equal
to someone who de ﬁes God? No, they are not equal. 19Those who
believe and do good deeds will have Gardens awaiting them as their
home and as a reward for what they have done. 20As for those who
defy God, their home will be the Fire. Whenever they try to escapeit, they will be driven back into it, and they will be told, ‘Taste thetorment of the Fire, which you persistently denied.’ 21We shall cer-
tainly make them taste a nearer torment [in this life] prior to thegreater torment, so that perhaps they may return [to the right path].22Who does more wrong than someone who, when messages from his
Lord are recited to him, turns away from them? We shall in ﬂict
retribution on the guilty.
23We gave Moses the Scripture– – so [Muhammad] do not doubt
that you are receiving it– – and We made it a guide for the Children of
Israel. 24When they became steadfast and believed ﬁrmly in Our
messages, We raised leaders among them, guiding them according toOur command. 25[Prophet], it is your Lord who will judge between
them on the Day of Resurrection concerning their di ﬀerences.
26Is it not a lesson for them [to see] how many generations We
destroyed before them, in whose homes they now walk? There trulyare signs in this– – do they not hear? 27Do they not consider how We
drive rain to the barren land, and with it produce vegetation fromwhich their cattle and they themselves eat? Do they not see? 28And
they say, ‘When will this Decision be, if you are telling the truth?’
29Say, ‘On the Day of Decision it will be no use for the disbelievers
to believe; they will be granted no respite.’ 30So [Prophet], turn away
from them and wait: they too are waiting.Bowing down in Worship
265 32:3033. THE JOINT FORCES
A Medinan sura which gets its title from the incident of the Battle of the Trench
inah5/627ce (verses 9–27), when the joint forces of various tribes of
disbelievers besieged Medina. The believers dug a ditch, which the disbelieverswere unable to cross, and eventually the enemy retreated in disarray. This ismentioned in order to remind the believers of God’s goodness to them, so that
they may obey the numerous instructions given in the sura, starting with the
regulation of adoption and including proper conduct towards the Prophet andhis wives. The hypocrites are warned to stop their bad behaviour.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Prophet, be mindful of God and do not give in to the disbelievers
and the hypocrites: God is all knowing, all wise. 2Follow what your
Lord reveals to you: God is well aware of all your actions. 3Put your
trust in God: God is enough to trust. 4God does not put two hearts
within a man’s breast. He does not turn the wives you reject andliken to your mothers’ backs
a into your real mothers; nor does He
make your adopted sons into real sons. These are only words fromyour mouths, while God speaks the truth and guides people to theright path.
5Name your adopted sons after their real fathers: this is more
equitable in God’s eyes– –if you do not know who their fathers are[they are your] ‘brothers-in-religion’ and protégés.
b You will not be
blamed if you make a mistake, only for what your hearts deliberatelyintend; God is most forgiving and merciful. 6The Prophet is more
protective towards the believers than they are themselves, while hiswives are their mothers.
c In God’s Scripture, blood-relatives have a
stronger claim than other believers and emigrants, though you may
still bestow gifts on your protégés. All this is written in the Scripture.
aIn pre-Islamic Arabia the husband sometimes said to his wife, ‘From now on, you
are to me like my mother’s back,’ by which he meant that he refused to have furtherconjugal relations with her, yet did not divorce her and so give her the freedom toremarry (see 58:1–4).
bMawla  in Arabic has many meanings, including ‘protégé’, ‘client’, ‘companion’.
cThe Prophet’s wives were given the title ‘Mothers of the Believers’. Cf. verse 53.7We took a solemn pledge from the prophets– – from you
[Muhammad], from Noah, from Abraham, from Moses, from Jesus,son of Mary– – We took a solemn pledge from all of them: 8God will
question [even] the truthful about their sincerity, and for those whoreject the truth He has prepared a painful torment.
9You who believe, remember God’s goodness to you when mighty
armies massed against you: We sent a violent wind and invisible
forces against them. God sees all that you do. 10They massed against
you from above and below; your eyes rolled [with fear], your heartsrose into your throats, and you thought [ill] thoughts of God.11There the believers were sorely tested and deeply shaken: 12the
hypocrites and the sick at heart said, ‘God and His Messengerpromised us nothing but delusions!’ 13Some of them said, ‘People of
Yathrib,
a you will not be able to withstand [the attack], so go back!’
Some of them asked the Prophet’s permission to leave, saying, ‘Ourhouses are exposed,’ even though they were not– – they just wanted
to run away: 14had the city been invaded from all sides, and the
enemy invited them to rebel, they would have done so almost with-out hesitation. 15Yet they had already promised God that they would
not turn tail and ﬂee, and a promise to God will be answered for.
16[Prophet], say, ‘Running away will not bene ﬁt you. If you manage
to escape death or slaughter, you will only be permitted to enjoy[life] for a short while.’ 17Say, ‘If God wishes to harm you, who can
protect you? If God wishes to show you mercy, who can prevent
Him?’ They will ﬁnd no one but God to protect or help them.
18God knows exactly who among you hinder others, who
[secretly] say to their brothers, ‘Come and join us,’ who hardly evercome out to ﬁght, 19who begrudge you [believers] any help. When
fear comes,
b you [Prophet] see them looking at you with eyes rolling
like someone in their death throes; when fear has passed, they attack
you with sharp tongues and begrudge you any good. Such men donot believe, and God brings their deeds to nothing– – that is all too
easy for God. 20They think the joint forces have not gone, and if the
joint forces did come again they would wish they were in the desert,wandering among the Bedouin and seeking news about you [from asafe distance]. Even if they were with you [believers], they would
aThe pre-Islamic name for Medina.
bThis speci ﬁcally refers to fear felt in battle in this context ( al-Mu ῾jam al-Wasit ).The Joint Forces 267 33:20hardly ﬁght at all. 21The Messenger of God is an excellent model for
those of you who put your hope in God and the Last Day andremember Him often.
22When the believers saw the joint forces, they said, ‘This is what
God and His Messenger promised us: the promise of God and HisMessenger is true,’ and this only served to increase their faith andsubmission to God. 23There are men among the believers who hon-
oured their pledge to God: some of them have ful ﬁlled it by death,
and some are still waiting. They have not changed in the least.
24[Such trials are ordained] so that God may reward the truthful for
their honesty and punish the hypocrites, if He so wills, or He mayrelent towards them, for God is forgiving and merciful. 25God sent
back the disbelievers
a along with their rage– – they gained no bene-
ﬁt–– and spared the believers from ﬁghting. He is strong and mighty.
26He brought those People of the Book who supported them down
from their strongholds and put panic into their hearts. Some ofthem you [believers] killed and some you took captive. 27He passed
on to you their land, their houses, their possessions, and a land whereyou had not set foot: God has power over everything.
28Prophet, say to your wives,
b‘If your desire is for the present life
and its ﬁnery, then come, I will make provision for you and release
you with kindness, 29but if you desire God, His Messenger, and the
Final Home, then remember that God has prepared great rewardsfor those of you who do good.’ 30Wives of the Prophet, if any of you
does something clearly outrageous, she will be doubly punished– –
that is easy for God– –31but if any of you is obedient to God and His
Messenger and does good deeds, know that We shall give her adouble reward and have prepared a generous provision for her.
32Wives of the Prophet, you are not like any other woman. If you are
truly mindful of God, do not speak too softly in case the sick at heartshould lust after you, but speak in an appropriate manner; 33stay at
home, and do not ﬂaunt your ﬁnery as they used to in the pagan past;
keep up the prayer, give the prescribed alms, and obey God and HisMessenger. God wishes to keep uncleanness away from you, peopleof the [Prophet’s] House, and to purify you thoroughly. 34Remember
aThis refers to the sandstorm that caused the disbelievers to go back without success.
bSome of the Prophet’s wives decided to ask him for more provision, seeing that he
had become leader of a new state.The Qur ᾿an 33:21 268what is recited in your houses of God’s revelations and wisdom, for
God is all subtle, all aware.
35For men and women who are devoted to God– – believing men
and women, obedient men and women, truthful men and women,steadfast men and women, humble men and women, charitablemen and women, fasting men and women, chaste men and women,men and women who remember God often– – God has prepared
forgiveness and a rich reward.
36When God and His Messenger have decided on a matter that
concerns them, it is not ﬁtting for any believing man or woman to
claim freedom of choice in that matter: whoever disobeys God andHis Messenger is far astray. 37When you [Prophet] said to the man
who had been favoured by God and by you, ‘Keep your wife and bemindful of God,’ you hid in your heart what God would later reveal:you were afraid of people, but it is more ﬁtting that you fear God.
When Zayd no longer wanted her,
a We gave her to you in marriage
so that there might be no fault in believers marrying the wives of
their adopted sons after they no longer wanted them. God’s com-mand must be carried out: 38the Prophet is not at fault for what God
has ordained for him. This was God’s practice with those who wentbefore– – God’s command must be ful ﬁlled––39[and with all] those
who deliver God’s messages and fear only Him and no other: God’sreckoning is enough. 40Muhammad is not the father of any one of
you men; he is God’s Messenger and the seal of the prophets: Godknows everything. 41Believers, remember God often 42and glorify
Him morning and evening: 43it is He who blesses you, as do His
angels, in order to lead you out of the depths of darkness into thelight. He is ever merciful towards the believers– –44when they meet
Him they will be greeted with ‘Peace’– – and He has prepared a
generous reward for them.
45Prophet, We have sent you as a witness, as a bearer of good news
and warning, 46as one who calls people to God by His leave, as a
light-giving lamp. 47Give the believers the good news that great
bounty awaits them from God. 48Do not give in to the disbelievers
and the hypocrites: ignore the harm they cause you and put yourtrust in God. God is enough to trust.
aThe Prophet married Zayd, his adopted son, to Zaynab, his own cousin. Zayd later
divorced her and the Prophet took her as his own wife. This sura shows the marriage tobe lawful since adoption does not create blood relations that preclude marriage.The Joint Forces 269 33:4849Believers, you have no right to expect a waiting period when
you marry believing women and then divorce them before youhave touched them: make provision for them and release them inan honourable way. 50Prophet, We have made lawful for you the
wives whose bride gift you have paid, and any slaves God hasassigned to you through war, and the daughters of your unclesand aunts on your father’s and mother’s sides, who migrated withyou. Also any believing woman who has o ﬀered herself to the
Prophet and whom the Prophet wishes to wed– – this is only for you
[Prophet] and not the rest of the believers: We know exactly whatWe have made obligatory for them concerning their wives andslave-girls– – so you should not be blamed: God is most forgiving,
most merciful. 51You may make any of [your women] wait and
receive any of them as you wish, but you will not be at fault ifyou invite one whose turn you have previously set aside: this wayit is more likely that they will be satis ﬁed and will not be dis-
tressed and will all be content with what you have given them.God knows what is in your hearts: God is all knowing, forbearing.52You [Prophet] are not permitted to take any further wives, nor
to exchange the wives you have for others, even if these attractyou with their beauty. But this does not apply to your slave-girls:God is watchful over all.
53Believers, do not enter the Prophet’s apartments for a meal
unless you are given permission to do so; do not linger until [ameal] is ready. When you are invited, go in; then, when you havetaken your meal, leave. Do not stay on and talk, for that wouldoﬀend the Prophet, though he would shrink from asking you to
leave. God does not shrink from the truth. When you ask hiswives for something, do so from behind a screen: this is purerboth for your hearts and for theirs. It is not right for you tooﬀend God’s Messenger, just as you should never marry his wives
after him: that would be grievous in God’s eyes. 54God has full
knowledge of all things, whether you reveal them or not. 55The
Prophet’s wives are not to blame [if they are seen by] their
fathers, their sons, their brothers, their brothers’ sons, their sis-
ters’ sons, their women, or their slaves. [Wives of the Prophet], bemindful of God. God observes everything. 56God and His angels
bless the Prophet– – so, you who believe, bless him too and give
him greetings of peace. 57Those who insult God and His Messen-The Qur ᾿an 33:49 270ger will be rejected by God in this world and the next– – He has
prepared a humiliating torment for them– –58and those who
undeservedly insult believing men and women will bear the guiltof slander and ﬂagrant sin.
59Prophet, tell your wives, your daughters, and women believers
to make their outer garments hang low over them
a so as to be recog-
nized and not insulted: God is most forgiving, most merciful. 60If the
hypocrites, the sick at heart, and those who spread lies in the city donot desist, We shall rouse you [Prophet] against them, and then theywill only be your neighbours in this city for a short while. 61They
will be rejected. Wherever they are found, they will be arrested andput to death. 62This has been God’s practice with those who went
before. You will ﬁnd no change in God’s practices.
63People ask you about the Hour. Say, ‘God alone has knowledge
of it.’ How could you [Prophet] know? The Hour may well be near.
64God has rejected the disbelievers and prepared a blazing ﬁre for
them. 65There they will stay permanently, with no one to befriend or
support them. 66On the Day when their faces are being turned about
in the Fire, they will say, ‘If only we had obeyed God and theMessenger,’ 67and ‘Lord! We obeyed our masters and our chiefs, and
they led us astray. 68Lord! Give them a double punishment and reject
them completely.’
69Believers, do not be like those who insulted Moses– – God
cleared him of their allegations and he was highly honoured in God’seyes. 70Believers, be mindful of God, speak in a direct fashion and to
good purpose, 71and He will put your deeds right for you and forgive
you your sins. Whoever obeys God and His Messenger will trulyachieve a great triumph. 72We o ﬀered the Trust
b  to the heavens, the
earth, and the mountains, yet they refused to undertake it and were
afraid of it; mankind undertook it– – they have always been ineptc and
foolish. 73God will punish the hypocrites and the idolaters, both men
and women, and turn with mercy to the believers, both men andwomen: God is most forgiving, most merciful.
aThe Arabic idiom adna al-jilbab  means ‘make it hang low’, not ‘wrap around’ as
other translators have assumed ( al-Mu ῾jam al-Wasit ).
b[Of reason and moral responsibility]
cThe meaning of dhalama  is ‘put something out of its place’.The Joint Forces 271 33:7334. SHEBA
A Meccan sura that takes its name from the people of Sheba who were blessed,
and then punished for their ingratitude (verses 15–21). The Prophet is ﬁrst
encouraged through references to David and Solomon and how God favouredthem. The disbelievers of Mecca are warned through a description of thepunishment that awaits them on the Day of Resurrection. Two references aremade to their accusing the Prophet of madness (verses 8 and 46) and this charge is
thoroughly refuted.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Praise be to God, to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and
earth, and praise be to Him in the life to come. He is the All Wise,the All Aware. 2He knows all that goes into the earth and all that
comes out of it; He knows all that comes down from the heavens andall that goes up to them. He is the Merciful, the Forgiving. 3Still, the
disbelievers say, ‘The Last Hour will never come upon us.’ Say, ‘Yes,by my Lord, [it will], by Him who knows the unseen! Not even theweight of a speck of dust in the heavens or earth escapes His know-ledge, nor anything smaller or greater. It is all recorded in a clearRecord 4so that He can reward those who believe and do good deeds:
they will have forgiveness and generous provision.’ 5But as for those
who work against Our Revelations, seeking to undermine them,
there will be a torment of painful su ﬀering.
6[Prophet], those who have been given knowledge can see that
what has been sent to you from your Lord is the truth, and that itleads to the path of the Almighty, worthy of all praise. 7But the
disbelievers say, ‘Shall we show you a man who claims that, whenyou have been utterly torn to pieces, you will be raised in a newcreation? 8Has he invented a lie about God? Is he mad?’ No! It is
those who do not believe in the life to come who will su ﬀer torment,
for they are in gross error. 9Do they not think about what is in front
of them and behind them in the heavens and earth? If We wished,We could make the earth swallow them, or make fragments from theheavens fall down upon them. There truly is a sign in this for everyservant who turns back to God in repentance.10We graced David with Our favour. We said, ‘You mountains,
echo God’s praises together with him, and you birds, too.’ Wesoftened iron for him, 11saying, ‘Make coats of chain mail and
measure the links well.’ ‘Do good, all of you, for I see everythingyou do.’ 12And [We subjected] the wind for Solomon. Its outward
journey took a month, and its return journey likewise. We made afountain of molten brass ﬂow for him, and some of the jinn
worked under his control with his Lord’s permission. If one ofthem deviated from Our command, We let him taste the su ﬀering
of the blazing ﬂame. 13They made him whatever he wanted– –
palaces,
a statues, basins as large as water troughs, ﬁxed cauldrons.
We said, ‘Work thankfully, family of David, for few of my servantsare truly thankful.’ 14Then, when We decreed Solomon’s death,
nothing showed the jinn he was dead, but a creature of the eartheating at his stick: when he fell down they realized– – if they had
known what was hidden they would not have continued theirdemeaning labour.
15There was a sign for the people of Sheba, too, in their dwelling
place: two gardens, one on the right, one on the left: ‘Eat from whatyour Lord has provided for you and give Him thanks, for your land isgood, and your Lord most forgiving.’ 16But they paid no heed, so We
let loose on them a ﬂood from the dam and replaced their two gar-
dens with others that yielded bitter fruit, tamarisk bushes, and a fewlote trees.
b17In this way We punished them for their ingratitude– –
would We punish anyone but the ungrateful? 18Also, We had placed,
between them and the towns We had blessed, other towns withinsight of one another to which they could travel easily– – ‘ Travel safely
in this land by night and by day’– –19but [still] they complained, ‘Our
Lord has made the distance between our staging posts so long!’
c
They wronged themselves and, in the end, We made their fate abyword, and scattered them in countless fragments. There truly aresigns in this for every patient, thankful person. 20Satan was proved
right in his opinion of them, for they all followed him– – except for a
group of believers– –21even though he had no authority over them.
aMihrab  refers to a number of ﬁne edi ﬁces, including palaces ( al-Mu ῾jam al-Wasit ).
bLote tree: a thorny tree, also known as Christ-thorn, with edible fruit.
cFor this reading see A. H. Omar and A. S. Makram, Mu ῾jam al-Qira ᾿at al-
Qur ᾿aniyya  (Tehran, 1999 ), under this verse reference. This seems to make better sense
than the other reading ‘Lord, make our journeys further apart’.Sheba 273 34:21But [We aim] to distinguish those who believe in the life to
come from those who doubt it: [Prophet], your Lord observeseverything.
22Say, ‘Pray to your so-called gods besides God: they do not con-
trol even the weight of a speck of dust in heaven or earth, nor do theyhave any share in them, nor are any of them any help to God. 23Inter-
cession will not work with Him, except by those to whom He gives
permission.’ They will be asked, after the terror is lifted from theirhearts [on the Day of Judgement], ‘What did your Lord speak?’ and
they will answer, ‘The Truth. He is the Most High, the Most Great.’
24Say [Prophet], ‘Who gives you sustenance from the heavens and
earth?’ Say, ‘God does,’ and ‘[One party of us] must be rightly
guided and the other clearly astray.’ 25Say, ‘You will not be ques-
tioned about our sins, nor will we be questioned about what you do.’26Say, ‘Our Lord will gather us together, then He will judge justly
between us; He alone is the All Knowing Judge.’ 27Say, ‘Show me
those you joined to Him as partners. No indeed! He alone is God,the Almighty, the All Wise.’ 28We have sent you [Prophet] only to
bring good news and warning to all people, but most of them donot understand. 29And they say, ‘If what you say is true, when will
this promise be ful ﬁlled?’ 30Say, ‘You have an appointment for a
Day which you cannot put o ﬀ nor bring forward, even by a single
moment.’
a
31The disbelievers say, ‘We will believe neither this Qur ᾿an nor the
Scriptures that came before it.’ If only you could see [Prophet] howthe wrongdoers will be made to stand before their Lord, hurlingreproaches at one another. Those who were oppressed will say to theoppressors, ‘If it were not for you, we would have been believers.’32The oppressors will say to them, ‘Was it we who prevented you
from following right guidance after it had reached you? No! Youyourselves were sinners.’ 33The oppressed will say to them, ‘No, it
was your scheming, night and day, ordering us to disbelieve in Godand set up rivals to Him.’ When they see the punishment, they willfall silent with regret, and We shall put iron collars on the dis-believers’ necks. Why should they be rewarded for anything otherthan what they have done? 34Never have We sent a warner to a
community without those among them who were corrupted by
aNot ‘an hour’ ( al-Mu ῾jam al-Wasit ).The Qur ᾿an 34:22 274wealth saying, ‘We do not believe in the message you have been sent
with.’ 35They would say, ‘We have greater wealth and more children
than you, and we shall not be punished.’ 36Say [Prophet], ‘My Lord
gives in abundance to whoever He will and sparingly to whoever Hewill, though most people do not understand. 37Neither wealth nor
children will bring you nearer to Us, but those who believe and dogood deeds will have multiple rewards for what they have done, andwill live safely in the lofty dwellings of Paradise, 38whereas those who
work against Our messages, seeking to undermine them, will be
summoned to punishment.’ 39Say, ‘My Lord gives in abundance to
whichever of His servants He will, and sparingly to whichever Hewill; He will replace whatever you give in alms; He is the best of
providers.’
40On the Day He gathers them all together, He will say to the
angels, ‘Was it you these people worshipped?’ 41They will reply,
‘May You be exalted! You are our supporter against them! Really,they worshipped the jinn– – most of them believed in them.’ 42‘So
today neither of you has any power to bene ﬁt or harm the other,’
We shall tell the evildoers, ‘Taste the torment of the ﬁre which you
called a lie.’ 43When Our messages are recited to them, clear as
they are, they say, ‘This is only a man who wants to turn you away
from what your forefathers worshipped,’ and, ‘This [Qur ᾿an] is
nothing but lies he has made up.’ When the Truth comes to thedisbelievers, they say, ‘This is just plain sorcery,’ 44though We have
not given them any books to study nor sent any warner before you.45Those who lived before them also denied the truth– – these people
have not attained even a tenth of what We gave their predeces-sors–– they, too, rejected My messengers, and how terrible My
condemnation was!
46Say [Prophet], ‘I advise you to do one thing only: stand before
God, in pairs or singly, and think: there is no sign of madness inyour companion [the Prophet]– – he is only warning you before
severe su ﬀering arrives.’ 47Say, ‘If I have asked you for any reward,
you can keep it. It is God alone who will reward me: He is witness to
everything.’ 48Say, ‘My Lord hurls the Truth down [before you]. He
has full knowledge of all that is unseen.’ 49Say, ‘The Truth has come;
falsehood is powerless.’
a50Say, ‘If I go astray, that is my loss, and if I
aThe Arabic expression la yubdi ᾿ wa-la yu ῾id is an idiom meaning ‘powerless’. See
Zamakhshari, Asas al-Balagha .Sheba 275 34:50am rightly guided, it is through what my Lord has revealed to me.
He is all hearing, and ever near.’
51[Prophet], if you could only see their terror!a There will be no
escape when they are seized from a nearby place; 52they will say,
‘Now we believe in it,’b but how can they reach it from such a distant
place– –53they denied it all in the past, and threw conjecturec from a
far-o ﬀ place– – when a barrier has been placed between them and
what they desire,d just as was done with their kind before? They
were deep in doubt and suspicion.
aOn the Day of Resurrection.
bThe Truth.
cAbout God and the Hereafter.
dTo be allowed to go back to the world and believe and do good deeds, cf. 35:37.The Qur ᾿an 34:51 27635. THE CREATOR
A Meccan sura that a ﬃrms God’s power and Creation and contrasts this with
the powerlessness and uselessness of the ‘partners’ set up by the idolaters. Thesura warns the idolaters of their punishment and comforts the Prophet throughmention of previous messengers who were also rejected as liars. The greatrewards that await believers are described.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Praise be to God, Creator of the heavens and earth, who made
angels messengers with two, three, four [pairs of] wings. He adds tocreation as He will: God has power over everything. 2No one can
withhold the blessing God opens up for people, nor can anyone butHim release whatever He withholds: He is the Almighty, the AllWise. 3People, remember God’s grace towards you. Is there any
creator other than God to give you sustenance from the heavens andearth? There is no god but Him. How can you be so deluded?
4If they call you a liar [Prophet], many messengers before you
were also called liars: it is to God that all things will be returned.5People! God’s promise is true, so do not let the present life deceive
you. Do not let the Deceiver deceive you about God: 6Satan is your
enemy– –so treat him as an enemy– –and invites his followers only toenter the blazing ﬁre. 7Those who disbelieve will be punished
severely; those who believe and do good deeds will be forgiven, andrichly rewarded. 8What about those whose evil deeds are made
alluring to them so that they think they are good? God leaves who-ever He will to stray and guides whoever He will. [Prophet], do notwaste your soul away with regret for them: God knows exactly whatthey do.
9It is God who sends forth the winds; they raise up the clouds; We
drive them to a dead land and with them revive the earth afterits death: such will be the Resurrection. 10If anyone desires power,
all power belongs to God; good words rise up to Him and He lifts
up the righteous deed, but a severe torment awaits those who plotevil and their plotting will come to nothing. 11It is God who created
you from dust and later from a drop of ﬂuid; then He made you intotwo sexes; no female conceives or gives birth without His knowledge;
no person grows old or has his life cut short, except in accordancewith a Record: all this is easy for God.
12The two bodies of water are not alike– – one is palatable, sweet,
and pleasant to drink, the other salty and bitter– – yet from each you
eat fresh ﬁsh and extract ornaments to wear, and in each you see the
ships ploughing their course so that you may seek God’s bounty and
be grateful. 13He makes the night merge into the day and the day
into the night; He has subjected the sun and the moon– – each runs
for an appointed term. Such is God your Lord: all control belongs to
Him. Those you invoke beside Him do not even control the skin of adate stone; 14if you call them they cannot hear you; if they could
hear, they could not answer you; on the Day of Resurrection they
will disown your idolatry. None can inform you [Prophet] like theOne who is all aware.
15People, it is you who stand in need of God– – God needs nothing
and is worthy of all praise– –16if He wills, He can do away with you
and bring in a new creation, 17that is not di ﬃcult for God. 18No
burdened soul will bear the burden of another: even if a heavily ladensoul should cry for help, none of its load will be carried, not even by aclose relative. But you [Prophet] can only warn those who fear theirLord, though they cannot see Him, and keep up the prayer– –
whoever puri ﬁes himself does so for his own bene ﬁt–– everything
returns to God. 19The blind and the seeing are not alike, 20nor are
darkness and light; 21shade and heat are not alike, 22nor are the living
and the dead. God makes anyone He wills hear [His message]: youcannot make those in their graves hear. 23You are only here to warn
them– –24We have sent you with the Truth as a bearer of good news
and warning– – every community has been sent a warner. 25If they
call you a liar, their predecessors did the same: messengers came tothem with clear signs, scriptures, and enlightening revelation 26and
afterwards I seized the disbelievers– – how terrible My punishment
was!
27Have you [Prophet] not considered how God sends water down
from the sky and that We produce with it fruits of varied colours;
that there are in the mountains layers of white and red of varioushues, and jet black; 28that there are various colours among human
beings, wild animals, and livestock too? It is those of His servantswho have knowledge who stand in true awe of God. God is almighty,The Qur ᾿an 35:12 278most forgiving. 29Those who recite God’s scripture, keep up the
prayer, give secretly and openly from what We have provided forthem, may hope for a trade that will never decline: 30He will repay
them in full, and give them extra from His bounty. He is mostforgiving, most appreciative.
31The Scripture We have revealed to you [Prophet] is the Truth
and con ﬁrms the scriptures that preceded it. God is well informed
about His servants, He sees everything. 32We gave the Scripture as a
heritage to Our chosen servants: some of them wronged their own
souls, some stayed between [right and wrong], and some, by God’s
leave, were foremost in good deeds. That is the greatest favour:33they will enter lasting Gardens where they will be adorned with
bracelets of gold and pearls, where they will wear silk garments.
34They will say, ‘Praise be to God, who has separated us from all
sorrow! Our Lord is truly most forgiving, most appreciative: 35He
has, in His bounty, settled us in the everlasting Home where no toilor fatigue will touch us.’ 36But those who reject the truth will stay in
Hellﬁre, where they will neither be ﬁnished o ﬀ by death, nor be
relieved from Hell’s torment: this is how We reward hardened dis-believers. 37They will cry out loud in Hell, ‘Lord, let us out, and we
will do righteous deeds, not what we did before!’– – ‘ Did We not give
you a life long enough to take warning if you were going to? The
warner came to you, now taste the punishment.’ The evildoers willhave nobody to help them.
38God knows all that is hidden in the heavens and earth; He
knows the thoughts contained in the heart; 39it is He who made
you [people] successors to the land. Those who deny the truth willbear the consequences: their denial will only make them moreodious to their Lord, and add only to their loss. 40Say, ‘Consider
those “partners” of yours that you call upon beside God. Show me!What part of the earth did they create? What share of the heavensdo they possess?’ Have We given them a book that contains clearevidence? No indeed! The idolaters promise each other onlydelusion.
41God keeps the heavens and earth from vanishing; if they did
vanish, no one else could stop them. God is most forbearing, mostforgiving. 42[The idolaters] swore their most solemn oath that, if
someone came to warn them, they would be more rightly guided thanany [other] community, but when someone did come they turnedThe Creator
279 35:42yet further away, 43became more arrogant in the land, and intensi ﬁed
their plotting of evil– – the plotting of evil only rebounds on those
who plot. Do they expect anything but what happened to earlierpeople? You will never ﬁnd any change in God’s practice; you will
never ﬁnd any deviation there. 44Have they not travelled in the land
and seen how those before them met their end, although they weresuperior to them in strength? God is not to be frustrated by anythingin the heavens or on the earth: He is all knowing, all powerful. 45If
God were to punish people [at once] for the wrong they have done,
there would not be a single creature left on the surface of the earth.
He gives them respite for a stated time and, whenever their timecomes, God has been watching His servants.The Qur ᾿an 35:43 28036. Y A SIN
A Meccan sura that emphasizes the divine source of the Qur ᾿an and defends it
from the charge of being poetry made by man (verses 5–6,69–70). It warns of
the fate of men who are stubborn and always mock God’s revelations. They arereminded of the punishment that befell earlier generations, and of God’s poweras shown in His Creation. The end of the sura gives strong arguments for thereality of the Resurrection.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Ya Sin
2By the wisea Qur ᾿an, 3you [Muhammad] are truly one of the mes-
sengers sent 4on a straight path, 5with a revelation from the
Almighty, the Lord of Mercy, 6to warn a people whose forefathers
were not warned, and so they are unaware. 7The verdict has been
passed against most of them, for they refuse to believe. 8[It is as if]
We had placed [iron] collars around their necks, right up to their
chins so that their heads are forced up 9and set barriers before and
behind them, blocking their vision: they cannot see. 10It is all the
same to them whether you warn them or not: they will not believe.11You can warn only those who will follow the Qur ᾿an and hold the
Merciful One in awe, though they cannot see Him: give such peoplethe glad news of forgiveness and a noble reward. 12We shall certainly
bring the dead back to life, and We record what they send ahead ofthem as well as what they leave behind: We keep an account ofeverything in a clear Record.
13Give them the example of the people to whose town messengers
came. 14We sent two messengers but they rejected both. Then We
reinforced them with a third. 15They said, ‘Truly, we are messengers
to you,’ 16but they answered, ‘You are only men like ourselves. The
Lord of Mercy has sent nothing; you are just lying.’ They said,‘Our Lord knows that we have been sent to you. 17Our duty is only to
deliver the message to you,’ 18but they answered, ‘We think you are
aSee note to 10:1.an evil omen. If you do not stop, we shall stone you, and in ﬂict a
painful torment on you.’ 19The messengers said, ‘The evil omen is
within yourselves. Why do you take it as an evil omen when you arereminded of the Truth? You are going too far!’ 20Then, from the
furthest part of the city, a man came running. He said, ‘My people,follow the messengers. 21Follow them: they are not asking you to
reward them and they are rightly guided. 22Why should I not wor-
ship the One who created me? It is to Him that you will be returned.23How could I take besides Him any other gods, whose intercession
will not help me and who would not be able to save me if the Lord of
Mercy wished to harm me? 24Then I would clearly be in the wrong.
25I believe in your Lord, so listen to me.’
26He was told, ‘Enter the Garden,’
a so he said, ‘If only my people
knew 27how my Lord has forgiven me and set me among the highly
honoured.’ 28After him We did not send any army from heaven
against his people, nor were We about to: 29there was just one blast,
and they fell down lifeless.
30Alas for human beings! Whenever a messenger comes to them
they ridicule him. 31Do they not see how many generations We have
destroyed before them, none of whom will ever come back to them?b
32[Yet] all of them will be brought before Us. 33There is a sign for
them in the lifeless earth: We give it life and We produce grain from itfor them to eat; 34We have put gardens of date palms and grapes in
the earth, and We have made springs of water gush out of it 35so that
they could eat its fruit. It was not their own hands that made all this.
How can they not give thanks? 36Glory be to Him who created all the
pairs
c of things that the earth produces, as well as themselves and
other things they do not know about. 37The night is also a sign for
them: We strip the daylight from it, and– – lo and behold!– – they are
in darkness. 38The sun, too, runs its determined course laid down for
it by the Almighty, the All Knowing. 39We have determined phases
for the moon until ﬁnally it becomes like an old date-stalk. 40The sun
cannot overtake the moon, nor can the night outrun the day: eachﬂoats in [its own] orbit.
41Another sign for them is that We carried their seed in the laden
aThe implication may be that he was martyred, as his people die after him.
bAnother interpretation of this phrase is ‘none of them can trace [their genealogies]
back to them’, i.e. God wiped out the entire line.
cOr ‘varieties’.The Qur ᾿an 36:19 282Ark, 42and We have made similar things for them to ride in. 43If We
wished, We could drown them, and there would be no one to helpthem: they could not be saved. 44Only by Our mercy could they be
reprieved to enjoy life for a while. 45Yet when they are told, ‘Beware
of what lies before and behind you, so that you may be given mercy,’46they ignore every single sign that comes to them from their Lord,
47and when they are told, ‘Give to others out of what God has
provided for you,’ the disbelievers say to the believers, ‘Why shouldwe feed those that God could feed if He wanted? You must be deeply
misguided.’
48And they say, ‘When will this promise be ful ﬁlled, if what you
say is true?’ 49But all they are waiting for is a single blast that will
overtake them while they are still arguing with each other. 50They
will have no time to make bequests, nor will they have the chance toreturn to their own people.
51The Trumpet will be sounded and– – lo and behold!– – they will
rush out to their Lord from their graves. 52They will say, ‘Alas for us!
Who has resurrected us from our resting places?’ [They will be told],‘This is what the Lord of Mercy promised, and the messengers toldthe truth.’ 53It was just one single blast and then– – lo and behold!– –
they were all brought before Us. 54‘Today, no soul will be wronged in
the least: you will only be repaid for your deeds. 55The people of
Paradise today are happily occupied– –56they and their spouses– –
seated on couches in the shade. 57There they have fruit and whatever
they ask for. 58“Peace,” a word from the Lord of Mercy. 59But step
aside today, you guilty ones. 60Children of Adam, did I not command
you not to serve Satan, for he was your sworn enemy, 61but to serve
Me? This is the straight path. 62He has led great numbers of you
astray. Did you not use your reason? 63So this is the Fire that you
were warned against. 64Enter it today, because you went on ignoring
[my commands].’
65On that Day We shall seal up their mouths, but their hands will
speak to Us, and their feet bear witness to everything they have done.66If it had been Our will, We could have taken away their sight. They
would have struggled to ﬁnd the way, but how could they have seen
it? 67If it had been Our will, We could have paralysed them where
they stood, so that they could not move forward or backward. 68If We
extend anyone’s life, We reverse his development. Do they not usetheir reason?Ya Sin
283 36:6869We have not taught the Prophet poetry,a nor could he everb
have been a poet. 70This is a revelation, an illuminating Qur ᾿an to
warn anyone who is truly alive, so that God’s verdict may be passedagainst the disbelievers.
71Can they not see how, among the things made by Our hands, We
have created livestock they control, 72and made them obedient, so
that some can be used for riding, some for food, 73some for other
beneﬁts, and some for drink? Will they not give thanks? 74Yet they
have taken other gods besides God to help them, 75though these
could not do so even if they called a whole army of them together!76So [Prophet] do not be distressed at what they say: We know what
they conceal and what they reveal.
77Can man not see that We created him from a drop of ﬂuid?
Yet –– lo and behold!– – he disputes openly, 78producing arguments
against Us, forgetting his own creation. He says, ‘Who can give lifeback to bones after they have decayed?’ 79Say, ‘He who created them
in the ﬁrst place will give them life again: He has full knowledge of
every act of creation. 80It is He who produces ﬁre for you out of the
green tree– – lo and behold!– – and from this you kindle ﬁre. 81Is He
who created the heavens and earth not able to create the likes of thesepeople? Of course He is! He is the All Knowing Creator: 82when He
wills something to be, His way is to say, “Be” – – and it is! 83So glory
be to Him in whose Hand lies control over all things. It is to Himthat you will all be brought back.’
aSome of the Arabs dismissed the Qur ᾿an as poetry.
bThis is a classical meaning of yanbaghi .The Qur ᾿an 36:69 28437. RANGED IN ROWSa
The central point of this Meccan sura is the unity of God (verses 4 and 180–2)
and the refutation of the pagan belief that the angels were daughters of Godand worthy of worship. The angels themselves are quoted to refute this (verses164–6). The prophethood of Muhammad, is a ﬃrmed, as is the Hereafter.
There are two supporting sections: the scenes in the Hereafter (verses 19–68)
and the stories of earlier prophets (verses 75–148).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1By those [angels] ranged in rows, 2who rebuke reproachfully 3and
recite God’s word, 4truly your God is One, 5Lord of the heavens and
earth and everything between them, Lord of every sunrise. 6We have
adorned the lowest heaven with stars, 7and made them a safeguard
against every rebellious devil: 8they cannot eavesdrop on the Higher
Assemblyb– –pelted from every side, 9driven away, they will have
perpetual torment– – 10if any [of them] stealthily snatches away a
fragment,c he will be pursued by a piercing ﬂame.
11So [Prophet], ask the disbelievers: is it harder to create them
than other beings We have created?d We created them from sticky
clay . 12You marvel as they sco ﬀ,13take no heed when they are
warned, 14and resort to ridicule when they see a sign, 15saying, ‘This
is no more than blatant sorcery.’ 16‘What! After we have died and
become dust and bones, shall we really be raised up again, 17along
with our forefathers?’ 18Say, ‘Yes indeed, and you will be humili-
ated.’ 19Just one blast and– –lo and behold!– –they will look 20and say,
‘Woe to us! This is the Day of Judgement.’ 21[It will be said], ‘This is
the Day of Decision, which you used to deny. 22[Angels], gather
together those who did wrong, and others like them, as well as what-ever they worshipped 23beside God, lead them all to the path of Hell,
24and halt them for questioning: 25“Why do you not support each
other now?” ’– – 26no indeed! They will be in complete submission
on that Day– – 27and they will turn on one another accusingly.
aCf. 37:165–6;78:38.bOf angels.
cOf something he overheard.dCf. 40:57.28They will say, ‘You came to us from a position of power.’a29They
will say, ‘No! It was you who would not believe– –30we had no power
over you– – and you were already exceeding all limits. 31Our Lord’s
sentence on us is just and we must all taste the punishment. 32We led
you astray as we ourselves were astray.’ 33On that Day they will all
share the torment: 34this is how We deal with the guilty. 35Whenever
it was said to them, ‘There is no deity but God,’ they became arro-
gant, 36and said, ‘Are we to forsake our gods for a mad poet?’ 37‘No:
he brought the truth and con ﬁrmed the earlier messengers; 38you
will taste the painful torment, 39and be repaid only according to your
deeds.’
40Not so God’s true servants. 41They will have familiar provi-
sionsb––42fruits– – and will be honoured 43in gardens of delight;
44seated on couches, facing one another. 45A drink will be passed
round among them from a ﬂowing spring: 46white, delicious to those
who taste it, 47causing no headiness or intoxication. 48With them will
be spouses– – modest of gaze and beautiful of eye– –49like protected
eggs.c
50They will turn to one another with questions: 51one will say, ‘I
had a close companion on earth 52who used to ask me, “Do you really
believe that 53after we die and become dust and bone, we shall be
brought for judgement?”’ 54Then he will say, ‘Shall we look for
him?’ 55He will look down and see him in the midst of the Fire, 56and
say to him, ‘By God, you almost brought me to ruin! 57Had it not
been for the grace of my Lord, I too would have been taken to Hell.’58Then he will say [to his blessed companions], ‘Are we never to die
again after our earlier death? 59Shall we never su ﬀer? 60This truly is
the supreme triumph!’ 61Everyone should strive to attain this. 62Is
this the better welcome, or the tree of Zaqqum, 63which we have
made a test for the evildoers? 64This tree grows in the heart of the
blazing Fire,
d65and its fruits are like devils’ heads. 66They will ﬁll
their bellies eating from it; 67then drink scalding water on top of it;
aThe Arabic expression ‘from the right-hand side’ conveys the meaning of being in
the right or approaching from the most honourable angle, or with power and in ﬂuence
(see verse 30).
bSee2:25.
cArabs described beautiful women as being as precious as the ostrich eggs they
protected from the dust with feathers.
dThe disbelievers said, scornfully, ‘How can there be a tree in the Fire?’The Qur ᾿an 37:28 28668then return to the blazing Fire. 69They found their forefathers
astray, 70and rushed to follow in their footsteps– – before the dis-
believers [of Mecca], 71most men in the past went astray, 72even
though We sent messengers to warn them. 73See how those who were
warned met their end! 74Not so the true servants of God.
75Noah cried to Us, and how excellent was Our response! 76We
saved him and his people from great distress, 77We let his o ﬀspring
remain on the earth, 78We let him be praised by later generations:
79‘Peace be upon Noah among all the nations!’ 80This is how We
reward those who do good: 81he was truly one of Our faithful
servants. 82We drowned the rest.
83Abraham was of the same faith: 84he came to his Lord with a
devoted heart. 85He said to his father and his people, ‘What are you
worshipping? 86How can you choose false gods instead of the true
God? 87So what is your opinion about the Lord of all the Worlds?’
88then he looked up to the stars. 89He said, ‘I am sick,’ 90so [his
people] turned away from him and left. 91He turned to their gods
and said, 92‘Do you not eat? Why do you not speak?’ 93then he
turned and struck them with his right arm. 94His people hurried
towards him, 95but he said, ‘How can you worship things you carve
with your own hands, 96when it is God who has created you and all
your handiwork?’ 97They said, ‘Build a pyre and throw him into the
blazing ﬁre.’ 98They wanted to harm him, but We humiliated them.
99He said, ‘I will go to my Lord: He is sure to guide me. 100Lord,
grant me a righteous son,’ 101so We gave him the good news that he
would have a patient son. 102When the boy was old enough to work
with his father, Abraham said, ‘My son, I have seen myself sacri-ﬁcing you in a dream. What do you think?’ He said, ‘Father, do as
you are commanded and, God willing, you will ﬁnd me steadfast.’
103
When they had both submitted to God, and he had laid his son
down on the side of his face, 104We called out to him, ‘Abraham,
105you have ful ﬁlled the dream.’ This is how We reward those who
do good– –106it was a test to prove [their true characters]– –107We
ransomed his son with a momentous sacri ﬁce, 108and We let him be
praised by succeeding generations: 109‘Peace be upon Abraham!’
110This is how We reward those who do good: 111truly he was one of
Our faithful servants.
112We gave Abraham the good news of Isaac– – a prophet and a
righteous man– –113and blessed him and Isaac too: some of theirRanged in Rows 287 37:113oﬀspring were good, but some clearly wronged themselves. 114We
also bestowed Our favour on Moses and Aaron: 115We saved them
and their people from great distress; 116We helped them, so they were
the ones to succeed; 117We gave them the Scripture that makes things
clear; 118We guided them to the right path; 119We let them be praised
by succeeding generations: 120‘Peace be upon Moses and Aaron!’
121This is how We reward those who do good: 122truly they were
among Our faithful servants.
123Elijah too was one of the messengers. 124He said to his people,
‘Have you no fear of God? 125How can you invoke Baal and forsake
the Most Gracious Creator, 126God, your Lord and the Lord of your
forefathers?’ 127but they rejected him. They will be brought to pun-
ishmenta as a consequence; 128not so the true servants of God. 129We
let him be praised by succeeding generations: 130‘Peace be to Elijah!’
131This is how We reward those who do good: 132truly he was one of
Our faithful servants.
133Lot was also one of the messengers. 134We saved him and all his
family– –135except for an old woman who stayed behind– –136and We
destroyed the rest. 137You [people] pass by their ruins morning
138and night: will you not take heed? 139Jonah too was one of the
messengers. 140Heﬂed to the overloaded ship. 141They cast lots, he
suﬀered defeat, 142and a great ﬁsh swallowed him, for he had com-
mitted blameworthy acts. 143If he had not been one of those who
gloriﬁed God, 144he would have stayed in its belly until the Day when
all are raised up, 145but We cast him out, sick, on to a barren shore,
146and made a gourd tree grow above him. 147We sent him to a
hundred thousand people or more. 148They believed, so We let them
live out their lives.b
149Now [Muhammad], ask the disbelievers: is it true that your
Lord has daughters, while they choose sons for themselves?c150Did
We create the angels as females while they were watching? 151No
indeed! It is one of their lies when they say, 152‘God has begotten.’
How they lie! 153Did He truly choose daughters in preference to
sons? 154What is the matter with you? How do you form your
aIt is inaccurate to say ‘brought to account’, since this would apply to everyone,
including the true servants of God.
bOne of the classical meanings of matta ῾a is ‘to give long life’.
cThe pagan Arabs were ashamed to have daughters themselves, yet attributed
daughters to God.The Qur ᾿an 37:114 288judgements? 155Do you not re ﬂect? 156Do you perhaps have clear
authority? 157Bring your scriptures, if you are telling the truth.
158They claim that He has kinship with the jinn, yet the jinn them-
selves know that they will be brought before Him. 159God is far
above what they attribute to Him– –160the true servants of God do
not do such things– –161and neither you nor what you worship 162can
lure away from God any 163except those who will burn in Hell.
164[The angels say], ‘Every single one of us has his appointed place:
165we are ranged in ranks. 166We glorify God.’a
167[The disbelievers] used to say, 168‘If only we had a scripture like
previous people, 169we would be true servants of God,’ 170yet now
they reject [the Qur ᾿an]. They will soon realize. 171Our word has
already been given to Our servants the messengers: 172it is they who
will be helped, 173and the ones who supportb Our cause will be the
winners. 174So [Prophet] turn away from the disbelievers for a while.
175Watch them: they will soon see. 176Do they really wish to hasten
Our punishment? 177When it descends on their courtyards, how ter-
rible that morning will be for those who were warned! 178[Prophet],
turn away from the disbelievers for a while. 179Watch them: they will
soon see. 180Your Lord, the Lord of Glory, is far above what they
attribute to Him. 181Peace be upon the messengers 182and praise be to
God the Lord of all the Worlds.
aThis is the rebuke by the angels referred to in verse 2.
bIn classical Arabic jund means ‘supporters’, not just ‘armies’.Ranged in Rows 289 37:18238. SAD
This Meccan sura mentions previous prophets in support and encouragement for
Muhammad, and makes a clear link between the arrogance displayed bythe disbelievers of Mecca, previous generations, and Iblis, the original rebel.Theﬁrst and last verses assert the truth and nobility of the Qur ᾿an.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Sad
By the Qur ᾿an with its reminding . . .!a2Yet the disbelievers are
steeped in arrogance and hostility. 3How many generations We have
destroyed before them! They all cried out, once it was too late, forescape. 4The disbelievers think it strange that a prophet of their own
people has come to warn them: they say, ‘He is just a lying sorcerer.5How can he claim that all the gods are but one God? What an
astonishing thing [to claim]!’ 6Their leaders depart, saying, ‘Walk
away! Stay faithful to your gods! That is what you must do. 7We did
not hear any such claim in the last religion:
b it is all an invention.
8Was the message sent only to him out of all of us?’
In fact they doubt My warning; in fact they have not tasted My
punishment yet. 9Do they possess the treasures of your Lord’s
bounty, the Mighty, the All Giving? 10Do they control the heavens
and earth and everything between? Let them climb their ropes:c
11their armed alliance is weak and will be crushed. 12The people of
Noah, ῾Ad, and ﬁrmly-supportedd Pharaoh rejected their prophets
before them. 13Thamud, the people of Lot, and the Forest-Dwellers
each formed opposition [against theirs]. 14They all rejected the mes-
sengers and they were deservedly struck by My punishment: 15all
the disbelievers here are waiting for is a single blast that cannot be
aThe complement of this oath is understood to be ‘There is only one God’ (see 50:
1–2).
bAn allusion to the Christian Trinity.
cCf. note to 22:15.
dDhu’l-awtad  literally means ‘with his pegs’, but is understood here metaphorically,
to indicate something ﬁrmly ﬁxed; cf. its use with reference to mountains in 78:7.postponed. 16They say, ‘Our Lord! Advance us our share of punish-
ment before the Day of Reckoning!’ 17Bear their words patiently
[Prophet].
Remember Our servant David, a man of strength who always
turned to Us: 18We made the mountains join him in glorifying Us at
sunset and sunrise; 19and the birds, too, in ﬂocks, all echoed his
praise. 20We strengthened his kingdom; We gave him wisdom and a
decisive way of speaking. 21Have you heard the story of the two
litigants who climbed into his private quarters? 22When they reached
David, he took fright, but they said, ‘Do not be afraid. We are two
litigants, one of whom has wronged the other: judge between usfairly– – do not be unjust– – and guide us to the right path. 23This is
my brother. He had ninety-nine ewes and I just the one, and he said,
“Let me take charge of her,” and overpowered me with his words.’24David said, ‘He has done you wrong by demanding to add your
ewe to his ﬂock. Many partners treat each other unfairly. Those who
sincerely believe and do good deeds do not do this, but these are veryfew.’
[Then] David realized that We had been testing him,
a so he asked
his Lord for forgiveness, fell down on his knees, and repented: 25We
forgave him [his misdeed]. His reward will be nearness to Us, a goodplace to return to. 26‘David, We have given you mastery over the
land. Judge fairly between people. Do not follow your desires,lest they divert you from God’s path: those who wander from Hispath will have a painful torment because they ignore the Day ofReckoning.’
27It was not without purpose that We created the heavens and the
earth and everything in between. That may be what the disbelieversassume– – how they will su ﬀer from the Fire!– –28but would We treat
those who believe and do good deeds and those who spread corrup-tion on earth as equal? Would We treat those who are aware of Godand those who recklessly break all bounds in the same way? 29This is
a blessed Scripture which We sent down to you [Muhammad], forpeople to think about its messages, and for those with understandingto take heed.
30We gave David Solomon. He was an excellent servant who
aThis is allegedly an allusion to David’s acquisition of another man’s wife to add to
his own numerous wives.Sad 291 38:30always turned to God. 31When well-bred light-footed horses were
paraded before him near the close of day, 32he kept saying, ‘My love
ofﬁne things is part of my remembering my Lord!’ until [the horses]
disappeared from sight– –33‘Bring them back!’ [he said] and started
to stroke their legs and necks.a34We certainly tested Solomon,
reducing him to a mere skeleton on his throne.b35He turned to Us
and prayed: ‘Lord forgive me! Grant me such power as no one afterme will have– – You are the Most Generous Provider.’ 36So We gave
him power over the wind, which at his request ran gently wherever
he willed, 37and the jinn
c– –every kind of builder and diver 38and
others chained in fetters. 39‘This is Our gift, so give or withhold as
you wish without account.’ 40His reward will be nearness to Us, and
a good place to return to.
41Bring to mind Our servant Job who cried to his Lord, ‘Satan has
aﬄicted me with weariness and su ﬀering.’ 42‘Stamp your foot! Here
is cool water for you to wash in and drink,’ 43and We restored his
family to him, with many more like them: a sign of Our mercy and alesson to all who understand. 44‘Take a small bunch of grass in your
hand, and strike [her] with that so as not to break your oath.’
d We
found him patient in adversity; an excellent servant! He, too, alwaysturned to God.
45Remember Our servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, all men of
strength and vision. 46We caused them to be devoted to Us
e through
their sincere remembrance of the Final Home: 47with Us they will be
among the elect, the truly good. 48And remember Our servants
Ishmael, Elisha, and Dhu ’l-Ki ﬂ,f each of them truly good. 49This is a
lesson.
The devout will have a good place to return to: 50Gardens of
lasting bliss with gates wide open. 51They will be comfortably
aSome say that the horses distracted Solomon from remembering his Lord and that
he slaughtered the horses in anger at his having forgotten the afternoon prayer.
bAccording to Razi, quoting linguistic usage in Arabic, this is interpreted to mean
that Solomon became so ill that he was like a walking skeleton.
cSee34:12–13.
dQur ᾿anic commentators explain that, when his wife blasphemed, Job swore that if he
recovered from his illness, he would beat her with one hundred lashes. When herecovered, however, he regretted his hasty oath, so God gave him this instruction.
eAlternatively, ‘We made them pure’.
fSee note to 21:85.The Qur ᾿an 38:31 292seated; they will call for abundant fruit and drink; 52they will have
well-matched [wives] with modest gaze. 53‘This is what you are
promised for the Day of Reckoning: 54Our provision for you will
never end.’
55But the evildoers will have the worst place to return to: 56Hell to
burn in, an evil place to stay– –57all this will be theirs: let them taste
it–– a scalding, dark, foul ﬂuid, 58and other such torments. 59[It
will be said], ‘Here is another crowd of people rushing headlong tojoin you.’ [The response will be], ‘They are not welcome! They will
burn in the Fire.’ 60They will say to them, ‘You are not welcome! It
was you who brought this on us, an evil place to stay,’ 61adding, ‘Our
Lord, give double punishment to those who brought this upon us.’
62They will say, ‘Why do we not see those we thought were bad 63and
took as a laughing-stock? Have our eyes missed them?’ 64This is how
it will really be: the inhabitants of the Fire will blame one another inthis way.
65[Prophet] say, ‘I am only here to give warning. There is no god
but God the One, the All Powerful, 66Lord of the heavens and earth
and everything between, the Almighty, the Most Forgiving.’ 67Say,
‘This message is a mighty one, 68yet you ignore it. 69I have no
knowledge of what those on high discuss:
a70it is only revealed to me
that I am here to give clear warning.’
71Your Lord said to the angels, ‘I will create a man from clay.
72When I have shaped him and breathed from My Spirit into him,
bow down before him.’ 73The angels all bowed down together, 74but
not Iblis, who was too proud. He became a rebel. 75God said, ‘Iblis,
what prevents you from bowing down to the man I have made withMy own hands? Are you too high and mighty?’ 76Iblis said, ‘I am
better than him: You made me from ﬁre, and him from clay.’ 77‘Get
out of here! You are rejected: 78My rejection will follow you till the
Day of Judgement!’ 79but Iblis said, ‘My Lord, grant me respite until
the Day when they are raised from the dead,’ 80so He said, ‘You have
respite 81till the Appointed Day.’ 82Iblis said, ‘I swear by Your might!
I will tempt all 83but Your true servants.’ 84God said, ‘This is the
truth– – I speak only the truth– –85I will ﬁll Hell with you and all
those that follow you.’
aCf. 2:30.Sad 293 38:8586[Prophet], say, ‘I ask no reward from you for this, nor do I claim
to be what I am not: 87this is only a warning for all people. 88In time
you will certainly come to know its truth.’The Qur ᾿an 38:86 29439. THE THRONGS
A Meccan sura, whose title is taken from its concluding verses. The main focus
of the sura is the contrast between those who follow the true faith, and thosewho ascribe partners to God. The sura emphasizes that people are free to choosewhether to believe or disbelieve (verse 41), but urges them in the strongest possible
terms to turn to the right path while there is still time to repent (verses 53–61).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1This Scripture is sent down from God the Mighty, the Wise. 2It is
We who sent down the Scripture to you [Prophet] with the Truth, soworship God with your total devotion: 3true devotion is due to God
alone. [As for] those who choose other protectors beside Him, say-ing, ‘We only worship them because they bring us nearer to God,’God Himself will judge between them regarding their di ﬀerences.
God does not guide any ungrateful liar. 4God could have chosen any
of His creation He willed for o ﬀspring, but He is far above this! He
is the One, the Almighty. 5He created the heavens and earth for a
true purpose; He wraps the night around the day and the day aroundthe night; He has subjected the sun and moon to run their coursesfor an appointed time; He is truly the Mighty, the Forgiving.
6He created you all from a single being, from which He made its
mate; He gave you
a four kinds of livestock in pairs;b He creates you
in your mothers’ wombs, in one stage after another, in threefolddepths of darkness. Such is God, your Lord; He holds control, thereis no god but Him. How can you turn away? 7If you are ungrateful,
remember God has no need of you, yet He is not pleased by ingrati-tude in His servants; if you are grateful, He is pleased [to see] it inyou. No soul will bear another’s burden. You will return to yourLord in the end and He will inform you of what you have done: He
knows well what is in the depths of [your] hearts.
8When man su ﬀers some a ﬄiction, he prays to his Lord and turns
aLiterally ‘sent down’, i.e. in the Scripture, cf. 6:142–4.
bThere has been some confusion over numbering here, leading some translators to
render this passage ‘eight pairs’. In fact, the correct translation is either ‘eight head’ or‘four pairs’. Cf. 6:143–4.to Him, but once he has been granted a favour from God, he forgets
the One he had been praying to and sets up rivals to God, to makeothers stray from His path. Say, ‘Enjoy your ingratitude for a littlewhile: you will be one of the inhabitants of the Fire.’ 9What about
someone who worships devoutly during the night, bowing down,standing in prayer, ever mindful of the life to come, hoping for hisLord’s mercy? Say, ‘How can those who know be equal to thosewho do not know?’ Only those who have understanding will takeheed.
10Say, ‘[God says], believing servants, be mindful of your Lord!
Those who do good in this world will have a good reward– – God’s
earth is wide
a– –and those who persevere patiently will be given a
full and unstinting reward.’ 11Say, ‘I have been commanded to serve
God, dedicating my worship entirely to Him. 12I have been com-
manded to be the ﬁrst to submit.’ 13Say, ‘I fear the torment of a
terrible Day if I disobey my Lord.’ 14Say, ‘It is God I serve, dedica-
ting my worship entirely to Him– –15you may serve whatever you
please beside Him.’ Say, ‘The true losers are the ones who will losethemselves and their people on the Day of Resurrection: that isthe most obvious loss. 16They will have layers of Fire above them and
below.’ This is how God puts fear into His servants: My servants,
beware of Me.
17There is good news for those who shun the worship of false gods
and turn to God, so [Prophet] give good news to My servants 18who
listen to what is said and follow what is best. These are the ones Godhas guided; these are the people of understanding. 19What about the
one who has been sentenced to punishment? Can you [Prophet]rescue those already in the Fire? 20But those who are mindful of
their Lord will have lofty dwellings built for them, one above theother, graced with ﬂowing streams. This is a promise from God: God
does not break His promise.
21Have you not considered that God sends water down from the
sky, guides it along to form springs in the earth, and then, with it,brings forth vegetation of various colours, which later withers, turnsyellow before your eyes, and is crumbled to dust at His command?There is truly a reminder in this for those who have understanding.
22What about the one whose heart God has opened in devotion to
aSee29:56–60.The Qur ᾿an 39:9 296Him, so that he walks in light from his Lord? Alas for those whose
hearts harden at the mention of God! They have clearly lost theirway. 23God has sent down the most beautiful of all teachings: a
Scripture that is consistent and draws comparisons; that causes theskins of those in awe of their Lord to shiver. Then their skins andtheir hearts soften at the mention of God: such is God’s guidance.He guides with it whoever He will; no one can guide those Godleaves to stray.
24What about the one who will only have his bare face to protect
him from his terrible su ﬀering on the Day of Resurrection? It will be
said to the evildoers, ‘Taste what you have earned.’ 25Others before
them also disbelieved, and the punishment fell on them unawares:
26God gave them the punishment of disgrace in this world to taste;
the punishment will be even harder in the Hereafter, if only theyknew.
27In this Qur ᾿an, We have put forward all kinds of illustration for
people, so that they may take heed– –28an Arabic Qur ᾿an, free from
any distortion– – so that people may be mindful. 29God puts forward
this illustration: can a man who has for his masters several partnersat odds with each other be considered equal to a man devoted whollyto one master? All praise belongs to God, though most of them donot know.
30You [Prophet] will certainly die, and so will they, 31and, on the
Day of Resurrection, you will dispute with one another in the pres-ence of your Lord. 32So who could be more wrong than the person
who invents a lie about God and rejects the truth when it comes tohim? Is there not ample punishment for the disbelievers in Hell? 33It
is the one who brings the truth and the one who accepts it as truewho are mindful of God: 34they will have everything they wish for
with their Lord. Such is the reward of those who do good: 35God will
absolve them even of their worst deeds and will reward themaccording to their best.
36Is God not enough for His servant? Yet they threaten you
[Prophet] with those they worship other than Him. If God allows
someone to stray he has no one to guide him; 37if God guides some-
one no one can lead him astray. Is God not mighty and capable ofretribution? 38If you [Prophet] ask them, ‘Who created the heavens
and earth?’ they are sure to answer, ‘God,’ so say, ‘Consider those youinvoke beside Him: if God wished to harm me, could they undo thatThe Throngs
297 39:38harm? If God wished to show me mercy, could they withhold that
mercy?’ Say, ‘God is enough for me: all those who trust should puttheir trust in Him.’ 39Say, ‘My people, do whatever is in your
power– – and so will I. You will ﬁnd out 40who will su ﬀer humili-
ation,
a and on whom a lasting torment will descend.’
41We have sent the Scripture down to you [Prophet] with the
Truth for people. Whoever follows the guidance does so for his ownbeneﬁt, whoever strays away from it does so at his own peril: you are
not in charge of them. 42God takes the souls of the dead and the
souls of the living while they sleep– – He keeps hold of those whose
death He has ordained and sends the others back until theirappointed time– – there truly are signs in this for those who re ﬂect.
43Yet they take intercessors besides God! Say, ‘Even though these
have no power or understanding?’ 44Say, ‘All intercession belongs to
God alone; He holds control of the heavens and the earth; in the endyou will all return to Him.’
45Whenever God is mentioned on His own, the hearts of those
who do not believe in the Hereafter shrink with aversion, but theyrejoice when gods other than Him are mentioned. 46Say, ‘God! Cre-
ator of the heavens and earth! Knower of all that is hidden and allthat is open, You will judge between Your servants regarding theirdiﬀerences.’ 47If the evildoers possessed the earth’s assets twice over
they would o ﬀer them to ransom themselves from the terrible su ﬀer-
ing on the Day of Resurrection: God will show them something theyhad not reckoned with, 48the evil of their deeds will become plain to
them, and they will be overwhelmed by that at which they used tolaugh.
49When man su ﬀers some a ﬄiction, he cries out to Us, but when
We favour him with Our blessing, he says, ‘All this has been given tome because of my knowledge’– – it is only a test, though most of them
do not know it. 50Those who lived before them said the same. What
they did was of no use to them; 51they su ﬀered its evil e ﬀects.
Today’s wrongdoers will also su ﬀer the evil e ﬀects of their deeds:
they will not escape. 52Do they not know that God provides abun-
dantly for anyone He will and gives sparingly to anyone He will?There truly are signs in this for those who believe.
53Say, ‘[God says], My servants who have harmed yourselves by
aIn this world; the lasting torment will be in the Hereafter.The Qur ᾿an 39:39 298your own excess, do not despair of God’s mercy. God forgives all
sins: He is truly the Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful. 54Turn to
your Lord. Submit to Him before the punishment overtakes you andyou can no longer be helped. 55Follow the best teaching sent down to
you from your Lord, before the punishment suddenly takes you,unawares, 56and your soul says, “Woe is me for having neglected
what is due to God, and having been one of those who sco ﬀed!” 57Or
it says, “If God had guided me, I would have joined the righteous!”
58Or, faced by punishment, it says, “If only I could have another
chance, I would join those who do good!” 59No indeed! My messages
came to you and you rejected them: you were arrogant and rejectedthe truth.’
60On the Day of Resurrection, you [Prophet] will see those who
told lies against God, their faces darkened. Is there not ample pun-ishment for the arrogant in Hell? 61But God will deliver those who
took heed of Him to their place of safety: no harm will touch them,nor will they grieve. 62God is the Creator of all things; He has charge
of everything; 63the keys of the heavens and earth are His. Those
who have rejected the revelations of God will be the losers.
64Say, ‘Do you order me to worship someone other than God, you
foolish people?’ 65It has already been revealed to you [Prophet] and
to those before you: ‘If you ascribe any partner to God, all your workwill come to nothing: you will be one if the losers. 66No!
Worship God alone and be one of those who are grateful to Him.’67These people have no grasp of God’s true measure. On the Day of
Resurrection, the whole earth will be in His grip. The heavens willbe rolled up in His right hand– – Glory be to Him! He is far above the
partners they ascribe to Him!– –68the Trumpet will be sounded, and
everyone in the heavens and earth will fall down senseless exceptthose God spares. It will be sounded once again and they will be ontheir feet, looking on. 69The earth will shine with the light of its
Lord; the Record of Deeds will be laid open; the prophets and wit-nesses will be brought in. Fair judgement will be given betweenthem: they will not be wronged 70and every soul will be repaid in full
for what it has done. He knows best what they do.
71Those who rejected the Truth will be led to Hell in their throngs.
When they arrive, its gates will open and its keepers will say to them,‘Were you not sent your own messengers to recite the revelations ofyour Lord to you and warn you that you would meet this Day?’ andThe Throngs
299 39:71they will say, ‘Yes indeed we were.’ But the sentence of punishment
will have been passed against those who rejected the truth. 72It will be
said, ‘Enter the gates of Hell: there you will remain. How evil is theabode of the arrogant!’
73Those who were mindful of their Lord will be led in throngs to
the Garden. When they arrive, they will ﬁnd its gates wide open, and
its keepers will say to them, ‘Peace be upon you. You have been good.
Come in: you are here to stay,’ 74and they will say, ‘Praise be to God
who has kept His promise to us and given us this land as our own.Now we may live wherever we please in the Garden.’ How excellentis the reward of those who labour! 75You [Prophet] will see the angels
surrounding the Throne, glorifying their Lord with praise. Truejudgement will have been passed between them, and it will be said,‘Praise be to God, the Lord of the Worlds.’The Qur ᾿an 39:72 30040. THE FORGIVER
A Meccan sura with two recurring themes: disputing God’s truth (verses 4,
35,69) and calling upon Him (verses 14,49,50,60,65,73). In the opening
verses God is described as the Forgiver, and the Accepter of repentance, yetsevere in punishment, and this dual aspect is exempli ﬁed in the sura. The
central section of the sura deals with the story of Pharaoh and Moses (verses23–54): the destruction of one and victory of the other are stated in verses 45
and51. The Prophet is, in his turn, urged to be steadfast and to ignore the
taunts of the disbelievers (verses 55 and 77).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Ha Mim
2This Scripture is sent down from God, the Almighty, the All
Knowing, 3Forgiver of sins and Accepter of repentance, severe in
punishment, in ﬁnite in bounty. There is no god but Him; to Him is
the ultimate return. 4It is only the disbelievers who dispute God’s
revelations. [Prophet], do not be dazzled by their movements backand forth across the land.
a5Before them the people of Noah rejected
the truth and so did those who formed opposition after them: every
community schemed to destroy its messenger and strove to refutetruth with falsehood; but it was I who destroyed them. How terribleMy punishment was! 6In this way your Lord’s sentence was passed
against the disbelievers that they would be the inhabitants of the Fire.
7Those [angels] who carry the Throne and those who surround it
celebrate the praise of their Lord and have faith in Him. They begforgiveness for the believers: ‘Our Lord, You embrace all things inmercy and knowledge, so forgive those who turn to You and followYour path. Save them from the pains of Hell 8and admit them, Lord,
to the lasting Gardens You have promised to them, together withtheir righteous ancestors,
b spouses, and o ﬀspring: You alone are the
Almighty, the All Wise. 9Protect them from all evil deeds: those You
aMaking wealth by trading.
bThe word aba ᾿ includes male and female ancestors. Father and mother
are called abawan .protect on that Day from [the punishment for] evil deeds will receive
Your mercy– – that is the supreme triumph.’ 10But those who dis-
believed will be told, ‘When you were called to the faith and rejectedit, God’s disgust with you was even greater then than the self-disgustyou feel [today].’ 11They will say, ‘Our Lord, twice You have caused
us to be lifeless
a and twice You have brought us to life. Now we
recognize our sins. Is there any way out?’ 12[They will be told], ‘This
is all because when God alone was invoked you rejected this, yetwhen others were associated with Him you believed [in them].’Judgement belongs to God the Most High, the Most Great.
13It is He who shows you [people] His signs and sends water down
from the sky to sustain you, though only those who turn to God willtake heed. 14So call upon God and dedicate your religion to Him
alone, however hateful this may be to the disbelievers: 15He is exalted
in rank, the Lord of the Throne. He sends revelations with His
teachings to whichever of His servants He will, in order to warn of
the Day of Meeting, 16the Day when they will come out and nothing
about them will be concealed from God. ‘Who has control today?’‘God, the One, the All Powerful. 17Today each soul will be rewarded
for whatever it has done; today no injustice will be done. God is swiftin reckoning.’
18Warn them [Prophet] of the ever-approaching Day, when hearts
are at throats, choking them. The evildoer will have no friends, norany intercessor to be heeded. 19God is aware of the most furtive of
glances, and of all that hearts conceal: 20God will judge with truth,
while those they invoke besides Him will not judge at all. God is theAll Hearing, the All Seeing.
21Have they not travelled through the land and seen how those
who lived before them met their end? They were stronger than themand made a more impressive mark on the land, yet God destroyedthem for their sins– – they had no one to defend them against Him– –
22because messengers repeatedly came to them with clear signs and
still they rejected them. God destroyed them: He is truly full ofstrength, severe in punishment.
aLiterally ‘dead’, leading some commentators to interpret this as referring to one’s
initial death, followed shortly thereafter by a second ‘death’ after questioning in thegrave. The more generally accepted view, however, is that earthly life is both precededand succeeded by a state of lifelessness. The two acts of giving life therefore refer tobirth and resurrection.40:10 302 The Qur ᾿an23We sent Moses with Our signs and clear authority 24to Pharaoh,
Haman, and Korah and they said, ‘Sorcerer! Liar!’ 25When he
brought the truth to them from Us, they said, ‘Kill the sons of thosewho believe with him; spare only their women’– – the scheming of
those who reject the truth can only go wrong– –26and Pharaoh said,
‘Leave me to kill Moses– – let him call upon his Lord!– – for I fear he
may cause you to change your religion, or spread disorder in the
land.’ 27Moses said, ‘I seek refuge with my Lord and yours from
every tyrant who refuses to believe in the Day of Reckoning.’
28A secret believer from Pharaoh’s family said, ‘How can you kill a
man just for saying, “My Lord is God”? He has brought you clearsigns from your Lord– – if he is a liar, on his own head be it– – and if he
is truthful, then at least some of what he has threatened will happen
to you. God does not guide any rebellious, outrageous liar. 29My
people, as masters in the land you have the power today, but who willhelp us against God’s might if it comes upon us?’ But Pharaoh said, ‘Ihave told you what I think; I am guiding you along the right path.’
30The believer said, ‘My people, I fear your fate will be the fate of
those others who opposed [their prophets]: 31the fate of the people
of Noah, ῾Ad, Thamud, and those who came after them– – God never
wills injustice on His creatures. 32My people, I fear for you on the
Day you will cry out to one another, 33the Day you will turn tail
andﬂee with no one to defend you from God! Whoever God leaves
to stray will have no one to guide him. 34Joseph came to you before
with clear signs, but you never ceased to doubt the message hebrought you. When he died, you said, “God will not send anothermessenger.”’
In this way God leaves the doubting rebels to stray– –35those who
dispute God’s messages, with no authority given to them, are doingsomething that is loathed by God and by those who believe. In thisway God seals up the heart of every arrogant tyrant. 36Pharaoh said,
‘Haman, build me a tall tower so that I may reach the ropes
a that
lead 37to the heavens to look for this God of Moses. I am convinced
that he is lying.’ In this way the evil of Pharaoh’s deed was madealluring to him and he was barred from the right path– – his scheming
led only to ruin.
38The believer said, ‘My people, follow me! I will guide you to
aCf. 22:15, where sabab  has the meaning ‘rope’.303 40:38 The Forgiverthe right path. 39My people, the life of this world is only a brief
enjoyment; it is the Hereafter that is the lasting home. 40Whoever
does evil will be repaid with its like; whoever does good and believes,be it a man or a woman, will enter Paradise and be provided forwithout measure. 41My people, why do I call you to salvation when
you call me to the Fire? 42You call me to disbelieve in God and to
associate with Him things of which I have no knowledge; I call you
to the Mighty, the Forgiving One. 43There is no doubt that what
you call me to serve is not ﬁt to be invoked either in this world or the
Hereafter: our return is to God alone, and it will be the rebels whowill inhabit the Fire. 44[One Day] you will remember what I am
saying to you now, so I commit my case to God: God is well aware ofHis servants.’ 45So God saved him from the harm they planned.
A terrible punishment engulfed Pharaoh’s people; 46they will be
brought before the Fire morning and evening.
a On the Day the
Hour comes, it will be said, ‘Throw Pharaoh’s people into the worsttorment.’ 47In the Fire they will quarrel with one another: the weak
will say to the haughty, ‘We were your followers, so can you nowrelieve us from some share of the Fire?’ 48but they will say, ‘We are
all in this together. God has judged between His creatures.’ 49Those
in the Fire will say to the keepers of Hell, ‘Ask your Lord to lessenour su ﬀering for one day,’ 50but they will say, ‘Did your messengers
not come to you with clear evidence of the truth?’ They will say, ‘Yesthey did,’ and the keeper will say, ‘You can plead, then, but the pleasof disbelievers will always be in vain.’
51We support Our messengers and the believers, in the present life
and on the Day when witnesses arise. 52On the Day when excuses
will not pro ﬁt the evildoers, their fate will be rejection and they will
have the worst of homes. 53We gave Moses guidance and passed
down the Scripture to the Children of Israel, 54as a guide and a
reminder to people of understanding. 55So be patient, Prophet, for
what God has promised is sure to come. Ask forgiveness for yoursins; praise your Lord morning and evening.
b56As for those who,
with no authority to do so, dispute God’s messages, there is nothingin their hearts but a thirst for a greatness they will never attain. Seekrefuge in God, for He is the All Hearing, the All Seeing.
a‘Morning and evening’ can convey a sense of ‘all the time’.
bSee preceding note.40:39 304 The Qur ᾿an57The creation of the heavens and earth is greater by far than the
creation of mankind, though most people do not know it. 58The
blind and the sighted are not equal, just as those who believe and dogood works and those who do evil are not equal: how seldom youreﬂect! 59The Final Hour is sure to come, without doubt, but most
people do not believe. 60Your Lord says, ‘Call on Me and I will
answer you; those who are too proud to serve Me will enter Hell
humiliated.’
61It is God who has given you the night in which to rest and the
day in which to see. God is truly bountiful to people, but mostpeople do not give thanks. 62Such is God your Lord, the Creator of
all things: there is no god but Him. How can you be so deluded?63This is how deluded those who deny God’s messages are. 64It is
God who has given you the earth for a dwelling place and the heavensfor a canopy. He shaped you, formed you well, and provided youwith good things. Such is God your Lord, so glory be to Him, theLord of the Worlds. 65He is the Living One and there is no god but
Him, so call on Him, and dedicate your religion entirely to Him.Praise be to God, the Lord of the Worlds.
66Say [Prophet], ‘Since clear evidence has come to me from my
Lord I am forbidden to serve those you call upon besides God: I amcommanded to submit to the Lord of the Worlds.’ 67It is He who
created you from dust, then from a drop of ﬂuid, then from a tiny,
clinging form, then He brought you forth as infants, then He allowedyou to reach maturity, then He let you grow old– – though some of
you die sooner– – and reach your appointed term so that you may
reﬂect. 68It is He who gives life and death, and when He ordains a
thing, He says only ‘Be’ and it is.
69[Prophet], do you see how deluded those who dispute God’s
messages are– –70those who reject the Scripture and the messages We
have sent through Our messengers? They will ﬁnd out 71when, with
iron collars and chains around their necks, they are dragged 72into
scalding water, and then burned in the Fire, 73and asked, ‘Where
now are those you called upon 74besides God?’ They will say, ‘They
have abandoned us: those we called upon before were really nothing
at all.’ ‘This is how God lets disbelievers go astray, 75all because on
earth you revelled in untruth and ran wild. 76Enter the gates of Hell,
there to remain– – an evil home for the arrogant.’
77So be patient [Prophet], for God’s promise is sure: whether We305 40:77 The Forgivershow you part of what We have promised thema in this life or
whether We take your soul back to Us ﬁrst, it is to Us that they will
be returned. 78We have sent other messengers before you– – some We
have mentioned to you and some We have not– – and no messenger
could bring about a sign except with God’s permission. When [theDay] God ordained comes, just judgement will be passed betweenthem: there and then, those who followed falsehood will be lost.
79It is God who provides livestock for you, some for riding and
some for your food; 80you have other bene ﬁts in them too. You can
reach any destination you wish on them: they carry you, as shipscarry you [on the sea]. 81He shows you His signs: which of God’s
signs do you still ignore?
82Have they not travelled through the land and seen how those
who lived before them met their end? They were more numerousthan them, stronger than them, and made a more impressive markon the land, yet what they achieved was of no use to them at all.83When messengers came to them with clear signs, they revelled in
the knowledge they had, and so they were engulfed by the verypunishment they mocked: 84when they saw Our punishment, they
said, ‘We believe in God alone; we reject any partner we ascribed toHim,’ 85but believing after seeing Our punishment did not bene ﬁt
them at all– – this has always been God’s way of dealing with His
creatures– – there and then the disbelievers were lost.
aThe disbelievers.40:78 306 The Qur ᾿an41. [VERSES] MADE DISTINCT
This Meccan sura deals with the obduracy of the disbelievers, the truthfulness
of the Qur ᾿an, the unity of God, and the inevitability of Resurrection. The title
refers to a term used to describe the Qur ᾿an in verse 3 and again in verse
44. The sura makes several references to the senses (verses 5,20–2,44) which
the disbelievers shut o ﬀ from perceiving the Truth in this world, and which
will then testify against their ‘owners’ on the Day of Resurrection, and itdescribes the arrogance displayed by people when all is well, contrasted withtheir humility and despair when di ﬃculties strike (verses 49–51).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Ha Mim
2A revelation from the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy; 3a
Scripture whose verses are made distinct as a Qur ᾿an in Arabic for
people who understand, 4giving good news and warning. Yet most of
them turn away and so do not hear. 5They say, ‘Our hearts are
encased against [the faith] you call us to; our ears are heavy; there is abarrier between us and you. So you do whatever you want, and soshall we.’ 6Say [Prophet], ‘I am only a mortal like you, [but] it has
been revealed to me that your God is One. Take the straight pathto Him and seek His forgiveness. Woe to the idolaters, 7who do not
pay the prescribed alms and refuse to believe in the world to come!8Those who believe and do good deeds will have a reward that never
fails.’
9Say, ‘How can you disregard the One who created the earth in
two Days?
a How can you set up other gods as His equals? He is the
Lord of all the worlds!’ 10He placed solid mountains on it, blessed it,
measured out its varied provisions for all who seek them– –all in fourDays. 11Then He turned to the sky, which was smoke– –He said to it
and the earth, ‘Come into being, willingly or not,’ and they said, ‘Wecome willingly’– – 12and in two Days He formed seven heavens, and
assigned an order to each. We have made the nearest one beautifully
aCommentators include these two days in the four mentioned in verse 10, so that the
total is six days; see 32:4. God’s Days are not like ours; see 22:47.illuminated and secure. Such is the design of the Almighty, the All
Knowing.
13If they turn away, say, ‘I have warned you about a blast like the
one which struck ῾Ad and Thamud: 14when their messengers came to
them, from all angles,a saying, “Serve no one but God,” they said,
“If our Lord had wished, He would have sent down angels. We donot believe in the message with which you have been sent.” 15The
people of ῾Ad behaved arrogantly throughout the land without any
right, saying, “Who could be stronger than us?” Did they not realize
that God, who created them, was stronger than them?’ They con-tinued to reject Our message, 16so We let a roaring wind loose on
them for a few disastrous days to make them taste the punishment ofshame in this world; more shameful still will be the punishment ofthe life to come, and they will not be helped. 17As for Thamud, We
gave them guidance but they preferred blindness, so they werestruck by a blast of humiliating punishment for their misdeeds. 18We
saved those who believed and were mindful of God.
19On the Day when God’s enemies are gathered up for the Fire
and driven onward, 20their ears, eyes, and skins will, when they reach
it, testify against them for their misdeeds. 21They will say to their
skins, ‘Why did you testify against us?’ and their skins will reply,‘God, who gave speech to everything, has given us speech– – it was
He who created you the ﬁrst time and to Him you have been
returned– –22yet you did not try to hide yourselves from your ears,
eyes, and skin to prevent them from testifying against you. Youthought that God did not know about much of what you were doing,23so it was the thoughts you entertained about your Lord that led to
your ruin, and you became losers.’ 24The Fire will still be their home,
even if they resign themselves to patience, and if they pray to beallowed to make amends, they will not be given permission to do so.
25We have appointed, for the disbelievers, companions
b who make
their past and present seem fair and right to them, but the sentencehas already been passed on them, along with generations of jinn andmen before them: they were losers. 26The disbelievers say, ‘Do not
listen to this Qur ᾿an; drown it in frivolous talk: you may gain the
aLiterally ‘from before and from behind’, i.e. using all angles of argument. The
messengers tried every method to persuade their people of the truth of their message.
bSee43:36;50:27 ﬀ.The Qur ᾿an 41:13 308upper hand.’ 27We shall certainly give the disbelievers a taste of
severe punishment. We shall repay them according to their worstdeeds– –28that is the reward of the enemies of God– – the Fire will be
their lasting home, a payment for their rejection of Our revelations.29The disbelievers will say, ‘Our Lord, show us those jinn and men
who misled us and we shall trample them underfoot, so that theymay be among the lowest of the low.’ 30As for those who say, ‘Our
Lord is God,’ and take the straight path towards Him, the angelscome down to them and say, ‘Have no fear or grief, but rejoice in the
good news of Paradise, which you have been promised. 31We are your
allies in this world and in the world to come, where you will haveeverything you desire and ask for 32as a welcoming gift from the
Most Forgiving, Most Merciful One.’
33Who speaks better than someone who calls people to God, does
what is right, and says, ‘I am one of those devoted to God’? 34Good
and evil cannot be equal. [Prophet], repel evil with what is better andyour enemy will become as close as an old and valued friend, 35but
only those who are steadfast in patience, only those who are blessedwith great righteousness, will attain to such goodness. 36If a prompt-
ing from Satan should stir you, seek refuge with God: He is the AllHearing and the All Knowing.
37The night, the day, the sun, the moon, are only a few of His
signs. Do not bow down in worship to the sun or the moon, but bowdown to God who created them, if it is truly Him that you worship.38If the disbelievers are too arrogant, [remember, Prophet, that]
those who are with your Lord glorify Him tirelessly night and day.39Another of His signs is this: you see the earth lying desolate, but
when We send water down on to it, it stirs and grows. He who gives itlife will certainly give life to the dead. He has power over everything.
40Those who distort the meaning of Our message are not hidden
from Us. Is he who is hurled into the Fire better, or he who comesthrough safely on the Day of Resurrection? Do whatever you want,God certainly sees everything you do. 41Those who reject the Qur ᾿an
when it comes to them– – though it is an unassailable Scripture
42which falsehood cannot touch from any angle, a Revelation
sent down from the Wise One, Worthy of All Praise– –43[should
remember that] you [Prophet] are not told anything that theprevious messengers were not told: your Lord is a Lord of forgive-ness, but also of painful punishment. 44If We had made it a foreign[Verses] Made Distinct
309 41:44Qur ᾿an, they would have said, ‘If only its verses were clear! What?
Foreign speech to an Arab?’ Say, ‘It is guidance and healing for thosewho have faith, but the ears of the disbelievers are heavy, they areblind to it, it is as if they are being called from a distant place.’ 45We
gave the Scripture to Moses but disputes arose about it– – if it were
not for a decree that had already been issued from your Lord, theywould already have been judged– – and still they are doubtful and
suspicious of it.
46Whoever does good does it for his own soul and whoever does
evil does it against his own soul: your Lord is never unjust to His
creatures. 47Knowledge of the Hour belongs solely to Him and no
crop comes out of its sheath, nor does any female conceive or give
birth, without His knowledge. On the Day He asks them, ‘Where are
My partners?’ they will answer, ‘We admit to You that none of us cansee [them]’: 48the gods they invoked before will have vanished away;
they will know that there is no escape.
49Man never tires of asking for good, but if evil touches him he
loses all hope and becomes despondent. 50Whenever We let him taste
some of Our mercy after he has been a ﬄicted, he is sure to say, ‘This
is all my own doing: I do not think the Hour will ever come, but evenif I were to be taken back to my Lord, the best reward would awaitme with Him.’ We shall most certainly inform the disbelieversof what they have done and give them a taste of severe torment.51Whenever We are gracious to man, he goes away haughtily, but, as
soon as evil touches him, he turns to prolonged prayer. 52Say
[Prophet], ‘Have you ever thought, what if this revelation really isfrom God and you still reject it? Who could be more astray thansomeone who cuts himself o ﬀ so far [from God]?’ 53We shall show
them Our signs in every region of the earth and in themselves, untilit becomes clear to them that this is the Truth. Is it not enough thatyour Lord witnesses everything? 54Truly, they doubt that they will
meet their Lord; truly He encompasses
a everything.
aThis is muhit , a metaphor in Arabic for having full knowledge and full power over
everything.The Qur ᾿an 41:45 31042. CONSULTATION
A Meccan sura that takes its name from verse 38, where the practice of
consultation ( shura ) is listed as one characteristic of the Muslim community.
The sura discusses man’s habit of creating division and disharmony in mattersof religion, and God’s all-prevailing power, wisdom, and ﬁnal decision. The
unity of religion is stressed (verse 13) as is the continuity of the prophets (verse
3). The Prophet is reminded that he cannot compel people to believe, that they
will be judged according to their deeds, and that he is only there to deliver themessage. The nature of revelation is described in verses 51–3.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Ha Mim 2 ῾Ayn Sin Qaf
3This is how God, the Mighty, the Wise, sends revelation to you
[Prophet] as He did to those before you. 4All that is in the heavens
and earth belongs to Him: He is the Exalted, the Almighty. 5The
heavens are almost broken apart from above as the angels proclaimthe praises of their Lord and ask forgiveness for those on earth. Godis indeed the Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful. 6As for those who
take protectors other than Him, God is watching them; you are not
responsible for them.
7So We have revealed an Arabic Qur ᾿an to you, in order that you
may warn the capital city
a and all who live nearby. And warn [espe-
cially] about the Day of Gathering, of which there is no doubt, whensome shall be in the Garden and some in the blazing Flame. 8If God
had so pleased, He could have made them a single community, butHe admits to His mercy whoever He will; the evildoers will have noone to protect or help them. 9How can they take protectors other
than Him? God alone is the Protector; He gives life to the dead; He
has power over all things. 10Whatever you may di ﬀer about is for
God to judge. [Say], ‘Such is God, my Lord. In Him I trust and toHim I turn, 11the Creator of the heavens and earth.’ He made mates
for you from among yourselves– –and for the animals too– –so that
aLiterally ‘the mother of cities’, Mecca.you may multiply. There is nothing like Him: He is the All Hearing,
the All Seeing. 12The keys of the heavens and the earth are His;
He provides abundantly or sparingly for whoever He will; He hasfull knowledge of all things.
13In matters of faith, He has laid down for you [people] the same
commandment that He gave Noah, which We have revealed to you[Muhammad] and which We enjoined on Abraham and Moses andJesus: ‘Uphold the faith and do not divide into factions within it’– –
what you [Prophet] call upon the idolaters to do is hard for them;
God chooses whoever He pleases for Himself and guides towards
Himself those who turn to Him. 14They divided, out of rivalry,
only after knowledge had come to them, and, if it had not been for
a decree already passed by your Lord to reprieve them until an
appointed time, they would already have been judged. Those afterthem, who inherited the Scripture, are in disquieting doubt about it.15So [Prophet] call people to that faith and follow the straight path
as you have been commanded. Do not go by what they desire, butsay, ‘I believe in whatever Scripture God has sent down. I am com-manded to bring justice between you. God is our Lord and yourLord– – to us our deeds and to you yours, so let there be no argument
between us and you– – God will gather us together, and to Him we
shall return.’ 16As for those who argue about God after He has been
acknowledged, their argument has no weight with their Lord: angerwill fall upon them and agonizing torment awaits them. 17It is God
who has sent down the Scripture with Truth and the Balance.
a How
can you tell? The Last Hour may well be near: 18those who do not
believe in it seek to hasten it, but the believers stand in awe of it.They know it to be the Truth; those who argue about the Hour arefar, far astray.
19God is most subtle towards His creatures; He provides [bounti-
fully] for whoever He will; He is the Powerful, the Almighty. 20If
anyone desires a harvest in the life to come, We shall increase it forhim; if anyone desires a harvest in this world, We shall give him ashare of it, but in the Hereafter he will have no share. 21How can they
believe in others who ordain for them things which God has notsanctioned in the practice of their faith? If it were not for God’s
aThe balance of justice and of nature; cf. verse 27.The Qur ᾿an 42:12 312decree concerning the ﬁnal Decision, judgement would already
have been made between them. The evildoers will have a grievouspunishment– –22you will see them fearful because of what they have
done: punishment is bound to fall on them– – but those who believe
and do good deeds will be in the ﬂowering meadows of the Gardens.
They will have whatever they wish from their Lord: this is the greatbounty; 23it is of this that God gives good news to His servants who
believe and do good deeds.
Say [Prophet], ‘I ask no reward from you for this, only the a ﬀec-
tion due to kin.’
a If anyone does good, We shall increase it for him;
God is most forgiving and most appreciative. 24How can they say,
‘He has invented a lie about God’? If God so willed, He could sealyour heart and blot out lies: God con ﬁrms the Truth with His words.
He has full knowledge of what is in the heart– –25it is He who accepts
repentance from His servants and pardons bad deeds– – He knows
everything you do. 26He responds to those who believe and do good
deeds, and gives them more of His bounty; agonizing torment awaitsthe disbelievers. 27If God were to grant His plentiful provision to
[all] His creatures, they would act insolently on earth, but He sends
down in due measure whatever He will, for He is well aware of Hisservants and watchful over them: 28it is He who sends relief through
rain after they have lost hope, and spreads His mercy far and wide.He is the Protector, Worthy of All Praise.
29Among His signs is the creation of the heavens and earth and all
the living creatures He has scattered throughout them: He has thepower to gather them all together whenever He will. 30Whatever
misfortune befalls you [people], it is because of what your own hands
have done– – God forgives much– –31you cannot escape Him anywhere
on earth: you have no protector or helper other than God. 32Among
His signs are the ships, sailing like ﬂoating mountains: 33if He willed,
He could bring the wind to a standstill and they would lie motion-
less on the surface of the sea– – there truly are signs in this for anyone
who is steadfast and thankful– –34or He could cause them to be
wrecked on account of what their passengers have done– – God
pardons much– –35to let those who argue about Our messages know
that there is no escape for them.
36What you have been given is only the ﬂeeting enjoyment of
aOr ‘I only do this out of a ﬀection for you as kin!’Consultation 313 42:36this world. Far better and more lasting is what God will give to
those who believe and trust in their Lord; 37who shun great sins
and gross indecencies; who forgive when they are angry; 38respond
to their Lord; keep up the prayer; conduct their a ﬀairs by mutual
consultation; give to others out of what We have provided forthem; 39and defend themselves when they are oppressed. 40Let
harm be requited by an equal harm, though anyone who forgives
and puts things right will have his reward from God Himself– –H e
does not like those who do wrong. 41There is no cause to act
against anyone who defends himself after being wronged, 42but
there is cause to act against those who oppress people and trans-gress in the land against all justice– – they will have an agonizing
torment– –43though if a person is patient and forgives, this is one of
the greatest things.
44Anyone God allows to stray will have no one else to protect him:
you [Prophet] will see the wrongdoers, when they face the punish-ment, exclaiming, ‘Is there any way of going back?’ 45You will see
them exposed to the Fire, abject in humiliation, glancing furtively,while those who believed exclaim, ‘The losers are the ones who havelost themselves and their people on the Day of Resurrection.’ Trulythe evildoers will remain in lasting torment; 46they will have no allies
to help them against God. There is no way [forward] for those God
allows to stray.
47So [people] respond to your Lord before there comes a Day that
cannot, against God’s will, be averted– – you will have no refuge on
that Day, and no possibility of denying [your sins]. If they still turnaway [remember that] 48We have not sent you [Prophet] to be their
guardian: your only duty is to deliver the message. When We give mana taste of Our mercy, he rejoices in it, but if some harm befalls himon account of what he has done with his own hands, then he isungrateful. 49God has control of the heavens and the earth; He cre-
ates whatever He will– – He grants female o ﬀspring to whoever He
will, 50male to whoever He will, or both male and female, and He
makes whoever He will barren: He is all knowing and all powerful.
51It is not granted to any mortal that God should speak to him
except through revelation or from behind a veil, or by sending amessenger to reveal by His command what He will: He is exalted
and wise. 52So We have revealed a spirit to you [Prophet] by Our
command: you knew neither the Scripture nor the faith, but WeThe Qur ᾿an 42:37 314made ita a light, guiding with it whoever We will of Our servants. You
give guidance to the straight path, 53the path of God, to whom
belongs all that is in the heavens and earth: truly everything willreturn to God.
aThe Scripture or the Qur ᾿an.Consultation 315 42:5343. ORNAMENTS OF GOLD
A Meccan sura named after the gold ornaments mentioned in verse 35, and
alluded to again in verse 53: in both instances God is refuting the claim of the
disbelievers that a true prophet would be rich. The fact that the angels arenot God’s daughters but His obedient servants is emphasized again and again(cf. verses 15–20,60). Similarly, the idea that Jesus could be the son of God
is clearly denied (verses 57–9).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Ha Mim
2By the Scripture that makes things clear, 3We have made it a Qur ᾿an
in Arabic so that you [people] may understand. 4It is truly exalted in
the Source of Scripturea kept with Us, and full of wisdom.
5Should We ignore you and turn this revelation away from you
because you are insolent people? 6We have sent many a prophet to
earlier people 7and they mocked every one of them, 8so We have
destroyed mightier people than [the disbelievers of Mecca] and theirexample has gone down in history. 9If you [Prophet] ask them, ‘Who
created the heavens and earth?’ they are sure to say, ‘They werecreated by the Almighty, the All Knowing.’ 10It is He who smoothed
out the earth for you and traced out routes on it for you to ﬁnd your
way, 11who sends water down from the sky in due measure– –We
resurrect dead land with it, and likewise you will be resurrected fromthe grave– – 12who created every kind of thing, who gave you ships
and animals to ride on 13so that you may remember your Lord’s
grace when you are seated on them and say, ‘Glory be to Him whohas given us control over this; we could not have done it by ourselves.14Truly it is to our Lord that we are returning.’
15Yet they assign some of His own servants to Him as o ﬀspring!
b
Man is clearly ungrateful! 16Has He taken daughters for Himself and
favoured you with sons? 17When one of them is given news of the
aLiterally ‘mother of Scripture’, identi ﬁed with the ‘Preserved Tablet’. Cf. 13:39;
85:22.
bThe Meccan pagans considered the angels to be daughters of God, yet they were
dismissive of their own daughters.birth of a daughter, such as he so readily ascribes to the Lord of
Mercy, his face grows dark and he is ﬁlled with gloom– –
18‘Someone who is brought up amongst trinkets, who cannot put
together a clear argument?’a19They consider the angels– – God’s
servants– – to be female. Did they witness their creation? Their claim
will be put on record and they will be questioned about it.
20They say, ‘If the Lord of Mercy had willed it, we would not have
worshipped them,’ but they do not know that– – they are only guess-
ing––21or have We perhaps given them a book before this one, to
which they hold fast? 22No indeed! They say, ‘We saw our fathers
following this tradition; we are guided by their footsteps.’ 23When-
ever We sent a messenger before you to warn a township, those
corrupted by wealth said, in the same way, ‘We saw our fathersfollowing this tradition; we are only following in their footsteps.’
24The messenger said, ‘Even though I bring you a truer religion than
what you saw your fathers following?’ and they replied, ‘But we donot believe the message you bring.’ 25We punished them: think about
how those who rejected the Truth met their end. 26Abraham said to
his father and his people, ‘I renounce what you worship. 27I worship
only Him who created me, and it is He who will guide me,’ 28and he
bequeathed these words to his descendants so that they might return[to God].
29I have let these people and their fathers enjoy long lives, and
now I have given them the Truth and a messenger to make things
clear– –30yet when the Truth came to them, they said, ‘This is sorcery.
We do not believe in it,’ 31and they said, ‘Why was this Qur ᾿an not
sent down to a distinguished man, from either of the two cities?’
b
32Are they the ones who share out your Lord’s grace? We are the
ones who give them their share of livelihood in this world and Wehave raised some of them above others in rank, so that some may takeothers into service: your Lord’s grace is better than anything theyaccumulate. 33If it were not that all mankind might have become a
single nation [of disbelievers], We could have given all those whodisbelieve in the Lord of Mercy houses with roofs of silver, sweepingstaircases to ascend, 34massive gates, couches to sit on, 35and golden
ornaments. All of these are mere enjoyments of this life; your Lord
aThis was the pre-Islamic opinion. One poet boasted that he was inspired by a male,
rather than a female, shaytan .
bMecca or Ta ᾿if, the two main cities of the region.Ornaments of Gold 317 43:35reserves the next life for those who take heed of Him. 36We assign an
evil one as a comrade for whoever turns away from the revelations ofthe Lord of Mercy: 37evil ones bar people from the right path, even
though they may think they are well guided. 38When such a person
comes to Us, he will say [to his comrade], ‘If only you had been as faraway from me as east is from west. What an evil comrade!’ 39[It will
be said to them], ‘You have done wrong. Having partners in punish-
ment will not console you today.’
40Can you [Prophet] make the deaf hear? Or guide either the blind
or those who are in gross error? 41Either We shall take you away and
punish them– – indeed We will– –42or We shall let you witness the
punishment We threatened them with; We have full power over
them. 43Hold fast to what has been revealed to you– – you truly are on
the right path– –44for it is a reminder
a for you and your people: you
will all be questioned. 45Ask the prophets We sent before you: ‘Did
We ever appoint any gods to be worshipped besides the Lord ofMercy?’
46We sent Moses to Pharaoh and his courtiers and he said, ‘I am
truly a messenger from the Lord of the Worlds,’ 47but when he
presented Our signs to them, they laughed, 48even though each sign
We showed them was greater than the previous one. We in ﬂicted
torment on them so that they might return to the right path. 49They
said, ‘Sorcerer, call on your Lord for us, by virtue of His pledge toyou: we shall certainly accept guidance,’ 50but as soon as We relieved
their torment they broke their word. 51Pharaoh proclaimed to his
people, ‘My people, is the Kingdom of Egypt not mine? And theserivers that ﬂow at my feet, are they not mine? Do you not see? 52Am I
not better than this contemptible wretch who can scarcely expresshimself? 53Why has he not been given any gold bracelets? Why have
no angels come to accompany him?’ 54In this way he moved his
people to accept and they obeyed him– – they were perverse people.
55When they provoked Us, We punished and drowned them all:
56We made them a lesson and an example for later people.
57When the son of Mary is cited as an example, your people
[Prophet] laugh and jeer, 58saying, ‘Are our gods
b better or him?’– –
aDhikr  can mean ‘renown’ or ‘reminder’:
bThe angels, whom they worshipped as the daughters of God and superior to Jesus,
whom they considered to be a god worshipped by Christians as the Son of God.The Qur ᾿an 43:36 318they cite him only to challenge you: they are a contentious people– –
59but he is only a servant We favoured and made an example for the
Children of Israel: 60if it had been Our will, We could have made
you angels,a succeeding one another on earth.
61This [Qur ᾿an] gives knowledge of the Hour:b do not doubt it.
Follow Me for this is the right path; 62do not let Satan hinder you,
for he is your sworn enemy. 63When Jesus came with clear signs
he said, ‘I have brought you wisdom; I have come to clear up someof your di ﬀerences for you. Be mindful of God and obey me: 64God
is my Lord and your Lord. Serve Him: this is the straight path.’
65Yet still the di ﬀerent factions among them disagreed– – woe to the
evildoers: they will su ﬀer the torment of a grievous day!– –66what are
they waiting for but the Hour, which will come upon them suddenlyand take them unawares? 67On that Day, friends will become each
other’s enemies. Not so the righteous– –68‘My servants, there is no
fear for you today, nor shall you grieve’– – 69those who believed in
Our revelations and devoted themselves to Us. 70‘Enter Paradise, you
and your spouses: you will be ﬁlled with joy.’ 71Dishes and goblets of
gold will be passed around them with all that their souls desire andtheir eyes delight in. ‘There you will remain: 72this is the Garden you
are given as your own, because of what you used to do, 73and there is
abundant fruit in it for you to eat.’ 74But the evildoers will remain in
Hell’s punishment, 75from which there is no relief: they will remain
in utter despair. 76We never wronged them; they were the ones who
did wrong. 77They will cry, ‘Malik,
c if only your Lord would ﬁnish
us oﬀ,’ but he will answer, ‘No! You are here to stay.’ 78We have
brought you the Truth but most of you despise it.
79Have these disbelievers thought up some scheme? We too have
been scheming. 80Do they think We cannot hear their secret talk and
their private counsel? Yes we can: Our messengers are at their sides,recording everything.
81Say [Prophet], ‘If the Lord of Mercy [truly] had o ﬀspring I
would be the ﬁrst to worship [them],
d but––82exalted be the Lord of
aJust as God was able to create Jesus without a father.
bAlternatively, the pronoun hu can also be seen to refer to Jesus: ‘[Jesus] gives
knowledge of the Hour’.
cThe angel in charge of Hell.
dAnother interpretation is ‘If the Lord of Mercy had a son I would be the ﬁrst to
worship him’ (Razi).Ornaments of Gold 319 43:82the heavens and earth, the Lord of the Throne– – He is far above
their false descriptions.’ 83Leave them to wade in deeper and play
about, until they face the Day they have been promised. 84It is He
who is God in heaven and God on earth; He is the All Wise, the AllKnowing; 85Exalted is He who has control of the heavens and earth
and everything between them; He has knowledge of the Hour; youwill all be returned to Him. 86Those gods they invoke besides Him
have no power of intercession, unlike those
a who bore witness to the
truth and recognized it. 87If you [Prophet] ask them who created
them they are sure to say, ‘God,’ so why are they so deluded? 88The
Prophet has said, ‘My Lord, truly these are people who do notbelieve,’ 89but turn away from them and say, ‘Peace’: they will come
to know.
aThose who have God’s permission. Cf. 20:109.The Qur ᾿an 43:83 32044. SMOKE
A Meccan sura that takes its title from verse 10, which describes a smoke- ﬁlled
day, taken by many to refer to the Day of Judgement. The sura highlights themercy that is the Qur ᾿an, addresses the obduracy of the powerful and wealthy
oppressors, and draws comparisons between the people of Pharaoh, Tubba ῾, and
the Meccans. The people of Paradise will enjoy heavenly bliss while those who
were mighty in this world will su ﬀer the torments of Hell.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Ha Mim
2By the Scripture that makes things clear, 3truly We sent it down on
a blessed night– –We have always sent warnings– – 4a night when
every matter of wisdom was made distinct 5at Our command– –We
have always sent messages to man– – 6as a mercy [Prophet] from your
Lord who sees and knows all, 7Lord of the heavens and the earth and
everything between– –if only you people were ﬁrm believers– – 8there
is no god but Him: He gives life and death– –He is your Lord and theLord of your forefathers– – 9yet in [their state of] doubt they take
nothing seriously.
a
10[Prophet], watch out for the Dayb when the sky brings forth
clouds of smoke for all to see. 11It will envelop the people. They will
cry, ‘This is a terrible torment! 12Lord relieve us from this torment!
We believe!’ 13How will this [sudden] faith bene ﬁt them? When a
prophet came to warn them plainly, 14they turned their backs on
him, saying, ‘He is tutored! He is possessed!’ 15We shall hold the
torment back for a whilec– –you are sure to return [to Us]– – 16and
on the Day We seize [them] mightily We shall exact retribution.
aLiterally ‘in doubt they play’.
bSome interpret this as referring to an actual event that occurred in the lifetime of
the Prophet– –a drought and famine in Mecca during which hunger caused eyes to mistover when the su ﬀerers looked at the sky– –but it seems more likely to refer to the Day
of Judgement.
cIf this passage is taken to refer to the Day of Judgement, here the torment is
relieved rather than held back, and the people return to disbelief rather than to God.17We tested the people of Pharaoh before them: a noble messenger
was sent to them, 18saying, ‘Hand the servants of God over to me! I
am a faithful messenger who has been sent to you. 19Do not consider
yourselves to be above God! I come to you with clear authority. 20I
seek refuge in my Lord and yours against your insults!a21If you do
not believe me, just let me be.’
22[Moses] cried to his Lord, ‘These people are evildoers!’ 23[God
replied], ‘Escape in the night with My servants, for you are sure to
be pursued. 24Leave the sea behind you parted and their army will be
drowned.’ 25Many a garden and spring they left behind, 26many a
cornﬁeld and noble building, 27many a thing in which they had
delighted: 28We gave these to another people to inherit. 29Neither
heavens nor earth shed a tear for them, nor were they given any time.30We saved the Children of Israel from their degrading su ﬀering 31at
the hands of Pharaoh: he was a tyrant who exceeded all bounds. 32We
chose them knowingly above others: 33We gave them revelations in
which there was a clear test.
34These people here
b assert, 35‘There is nothing beyond our one
death: we will not be resurrected. 36Bring back our forefathers, if
what you say is true.’ 37Are they better than the people of Tubba ῾c
and those who ﬂourished before them? We destroyed them all– – they
were guilty. 38We were not playing a pointless game when We created
the heavens and earth and everything in between; 39We created them
for a true purpose, but most people do not comprehend.
40The Day of Decision is the time appointed for all; 41a Day when
no friend can take another’s place. 42No one will receive any help
except for those to whom God shows mercy: He is the Mighty, theMerciful Lord. 43The tree of Zaqqum 44will be food for the sinners:
45[hot] as molten metal, it boils in their bellies 46like seething water.
47‘Take him! Thrust him into the depths of Hell! 48Pour scalding
water over his head as punishment!’ 49‘Taste this, you powerful,
respected man! 50This is what you doubted.’ 51But those mindful of
God will be in a safe place 52amid Gardens and springs, 53clothed in
silk and ﬁne brocade, facing one another: 54so it will be. We shall wed
aOne of the meanings of rajama  is ‘abuse’ or ‘cast aspersions’; another is ‘to stone’;
another is ‘to expel’.
bThe Meccans.
cHonori ﬁc title of the King of Yemen given to a succession of powerful kings who
ruled over southern Arabia in ancient times.The Qur ᾿an 44:17 322them to maidens with large, dark eyes. 55Secure and contented, they
will call for every kind of fruit. 56After the one death they will taste
death no more. God will guard them from the torment of Hell,57a bounty from your Lord. That is the supreme triumph.
58We have made this Qur ᾿an easy to understand– – in your own
language [Prophet]– – so that they may take heed. 59So wait; the
disbelievers too are waiting.Smoke
323 44:5945. KNEELING
A Meccan sura that takes its title from verse 28, where the kneeling posture of
all communities on the Day of Judgement is described. The sura addresses someof the arguments put forward by those sceptical of the truthfulness of theQur ᾿an. Emphasis is placed on the signs of God’s existence discernible in nature,
and on the painful punishment that awaits the doubters on the Day of Judge-ment. The misguided arrogance of the disbelievers (verses 8 and 31) is
contrasted with God’s true greatness (verse 37); references to God’s wisdom
and majesty open and close the sura.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Ha Mim
2This Scripture is sent down from God, the Mighty, the Wise.
3There are signs in the heavens and the earth for those who believe:
4in the creation of you, in the creatures God scattered on earth, there
are signs for people of sure faith; 5in the alternation of night and day,
in the rain God provides, sending it down from the sky and revivingthe dead earth with it, and in His shifting of the winds there are
signs for those who use their reason. 6These are God’s signs that We
recount to you [Prophet, to show] the Truth.
If they deny God and His revelations, what message will they
believe in? 7Woe to every lying sinful person 8who hears God’s
revelations being recited to him, yet persists in his arrogance as if hehad never heard them– –[Prophet] bring him news of a painful tor-ment!– – 9who, if he knows anything about Our revelations, ridicules
it! Such people will have a humiliating torment: 10Hell lurks behind
them and their gains will not bene ﬁt them, nor will those beings they
took as protectors beside God– –a tremendous torment awaits them.
11This is true guidance; those who reject their Lord’s revelations will
have a woeful torment.
12It is God who subjected the sea for you– –ships sail on it by His
command so that you can seek His bounty and give Him thanks– –
13He has subjected all that is in the heavens and the earth for your
beneﬁt, as a gift from Him. There truly are signs in this for those
who re ﬂect.14Tell the believers to forgive those who do not fear God’s days [of
punishment]a– –He will requite people for what they have done.
15Whoever does good bene ﬁts himself, and whoever does evil harms
himself: you will all be returned to your Lord.
16We gave scripture, wisdom, and prophethood to the Children of
Israel; We provided them with good things and favoured them aboveothers; 17We gave them clear proof in matters [of religion]. They
diﬀered among themselves out of mutual rivalry, only after know-
ledge came to them: on the Day of Resurrection your Lord willjudge between them regarding their di ﬀerences. 18Now We have set
you [Muhammad] on a clear religious path, so follow it. Do notfollow the desires of those who lack [true] knowledge– –19they cannot
help you against God in any way. Wrongdoers only have each otherto protect them; the righteous have God Himself as their protector.20This [revelation] is a means of insight for people, a source of
guidance and mercy for those of sure faith.
21Do those who commit evil deeds really think that We will deal
with them in the same way as those who believe and do righteousdeeds, that they will be alike in their living and their dying? Howbadly they judge! 22God created the heavens and earth for a true
purpose: to reward each soul according to its deeds. They will not bewronged. 23[Prophet], consider the one who has taken his own desire
as a god, whom God allows to stray in the face of knowledge, sealinghis ears and heart and covering his eyes– – who can guide such a
person after God [has done this]? Will you [people] not take heed?
24They say, ‘There is only our life in this world: we die, we live,
nothing but time destroys us.’ They have no knowledge of this;they only follow guesswork. Their only argument, 25when Our clear
revelations are recited to them, is to say, ‘Bring back our forefathersif what you say is true.’ 26[Prophet], say, ‘It is God who gives you life,
then causes you to die, and then He gathers you all to the Day ofResurrection of which there is no doubt, though most people do notcomprehend.’
27Control of everything in the heavens and the earth belongs to
God. When the Hour comes, those who follow falsehood will bethe losers on that Day. 28You will see every community kneeling.
a‘God’s days’ (plural) here suggests the days on which God delivers His punishment
in this world, not the Day of Judgement (singular).Kneeling 325 45:28Every community will be summoned to its record: ‘Today you will
be repaid for what you did. 29Here is Our record that tells the truth
about you: We have been recording everything you do.’ 30Those who
believed and did good deeds will be admitted by their Lord into Hismercy– – that is the clearest triumph– –31but those who disbelieved
[will be asked]: ‘When My revelations were recited to you, were you
not arrogant and persistent in wicked deeds? 32When it was said to
you, “God’s promise is true: there is no doubt about the Hour,” did
you not reply, “We know nothing of the Hour. This is only con-jecture in our opinion. We are not convinced”?’
33The evil of their actions will [then] become clear to them. The
punishment they mocked will engulf them. 34It will be said, ‘Today
We shall ignore you just as you ignored your appointment with thisDay. The Fire will be your home and no one will help you, 35because
you received God’s revelations with ridicule and were deceived byworldly life.’ They will not be brought out of the Fire on that Day,nor will they be given the chance to make amends.
36So praise be to God, Lord of the heavens and earth, Lord of the
worlds. 37True greatness in the heavens and the earth is rightfully
His: He is the Mighty, the Wise.The Qur ᾿an 45:29 32646. THE SAND DUNES
A Meccan sura. The title refers to the sand dunes mentioned in verse 21,
where the people of ῾Ad used to live, and where they were destroyed when they
rejected the warning of their prophet. It re ﬂects one of the major themes of this
sura: the inescapable punishment that awaits those who deny the truth and theResurrection. Emphasis is placed on the fact that communities more establishedthan the Meccans’ have been destroyed, and that even the jinn believe in theQur ᾿an before the disbelievers of Mecca do. Finally, the Prophet is encouraged
to be steadfast and await God’s judgement on the disbelievers.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Ha Mim
2This Scripture is sent down from God, the Almighty, the Wise. 3It
was for a true purpose and a speci ﬁc term that We created heaven
and earth and everything in between, yet those who deny the truthignore the warning they have been given. 4Say [Prophet], ‘Consider
those you pray to other than God: show me which part of the earththey created or which share of the heavens they own; bring me a
previous scripture or some vestige of divine knowledge– –if what yousay is true.’ 5Who could be more wrong than a person who calls on
those other than God, those who will not answer him till the Day ofResurrection, those who are unaware of his prayers, 6those who,
when all mankind is gathered, will become his enemies and disownhis worship?
7When Our revelations are recited to them in all their clarity, the
disbelievers say of the Truth that has reached them, ‘This is clearlysorcery,’ 8or they say, ‘He has invented it himself.’ Say [Prophet], ‘If
I have really invented it, there is nothing you can do to save me from
God. He knows best what you say amongst yourselves about it;He is su ﬃcient as a witness between me and you; He is the Most
Forgiving, the Most Merciful.’ 9Say, ‘I am nothing new among God’s
messengers. I do not know what will be done with me or you; I onlyfollow what is revealed to me; I only warn plainly.’ 10Say, ‘Have you
thought: what if this Qur ᾿an really is from God and you reject it?
What if one of the Children of Israel testi ﬁes to its similarity [toearlier scripture] and believes in it, and yet you are too proud to
[do the same]? God certainly does not guide evildoers.’
11Those who disbelieve say of the believers, ‘If there were any good
in this Qur ᾿an, they would not have believed in it before we did,’a
and, since they refuse to be guided by it, they say, ‘This is an ancient
fabrication.’ 12Yet the scripture of Moses was revealed before it as a
guide and a mercy, and this is a scripture con ﬁrming it in the Arabic
language to warn those who do evil and bring good news for those
who do good. 13For those who say, ‘Our lord is God,’ and then follow
the straight path there is no fear, nor shall they grieve: 14they are the
people of Paradise, there to remain as a reward for what they weredoing.
15We have commanded man to be good to his parents: his mother
struggled to carry him and struggled to give birth to him– – his bear-
ing and weaning took a full thirty months. When he has grown tomanhood and reached the age of forty he [may] say, ‘Lord, help meto be truly grateful for Your favours to me and to my parents; helpme to do good work that pleases You; make my o ﬀspring good. I turn
to You; I am one of those who devote themselves to You.’ 16We
accept from such people the best of what they do and We overlooktheir bad deeds. They will be among the people of Paradise– – the
true promise that has been given to them.
17But some say to their parents, ‘What? Are you really warning me
that I shall be raised alive from my grave, when so many generationshave already passed and gone before me?’ His parents implore Godfor help; they say, ‘Alas for you! Believe! God’s promise is true,’ butstill he replies, ‘These are nothing but ancient fables.’ 18The verdict
has been passed on such people, along with all the communities thatwent before them, jinn and human: they are lost. 19Everyone will be
ranked according to their deeds and God will repay them in full forwhat they have done: they will not be wronged. 20On the Day when
those who deny the truth are brought before the Fire, it will be said
to them, ‘You squandered the good things you were given in your
earthly life, you took your ﬁll of pleasure there, so on this Day a
punishment of shame is yours: you were arrogant on earth withoutany right, and exceeded all limits.’
aThe disbelievers had particular di ﬃculty in accepting the fact that some of those
who believed in Islam were people they considered to be humble ri ﬀ-raﬀ.The Qur ᾿an 46:11 32821Mention [Hud] of the tribe of ῾Ad: he warned his people among
the sand dunes– – other warners have come and gone both before and
after him– – ‘ Worship no one but God: I fear for you, that you will be
punished on a terrible Day,’ 22but they said, ‘Have you come to turn
us away from our gods? If what you say is true, bring down thatpunishment you threaten us with!’ 23He said, ‘Only God knows
when it will come: I simply convey to you the message I am sent with
but I can see you are an insolent people.’ 24When they saw a cloud
approaching their valley, they said, ‘This cloud will give us rain!’ ‘No
indeed! It is what you wanted to hasten: a storm-wind bearing a
painful punishment 25which will destroy everything by its Lord’s
command.’ In the morning there was nothing to see except their
[ruined] dwellings: this is how We repay the guilty.
26We had established them in a way we have not established you
[people of Mecca]; We gave them hearing, sight, and hearts, yet theirhearing, sight, and hearts were of no use to them, since they deniedGod’s revelations. They were overwhelmed by the punishment theyhad mocked. 27We have also destroyed other communities that once
ﬂourished around you– – We had given them various signs so that
they might return to the right way– –28so why did their gods not help
them, those they set up as gods besides God to bring them nearer to
Him? No indeed! They failed them utterly: it was all a lie of their
own making.
29We sent a group of jinn to you [Prophet] to listen to the Qur ᾿an.
When they heard it, they said to one another, ‘Be quiet!’ Then whenit was ﬁnished they turned to their community and gave them
warning. 30They said, ‘Our people, we have been listening to a
Scripture that came after Moses, con ﬁrming previous scriptures,
giving guidance to the truth and the straight path. 31Our people,
respond to the one who calls you to God. Believe in Him: He willforgive you your sins and protect you from a painful torment.’32Those who fail to respond to God’s call cannot escape God’s power
anywhere on earth, nor will they have any protector against Him:such people have clearly gone far astray.
33Do the disbelievers not understand that God, who created the
heavens and earth and did not tire in doing so, has the power tobring the dead back to life? Yes indeed! He has power over every-
thing. 34On the Day the disbelievers are brought before Hell [it will
be said to them], ‘Is this not real?’ ‘Yes, by our Lord,’ they will replyThe Sand Dunes
329 46:34and He will say, ‘Then taste the punishment for having denied the
truth.’
35Be steadfast [Muhammad], like those messengers of ﬁrm
resolve.a Do not seek to hasten the punishment for the disbelievers:
on the Day they see what they had been warned about, it will seem tothem that they lingered no more than a single hour of a single day [inthis life]. This is a warning. Shall any be destroyed except thedeﬁant?
aNoah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad are traditionally termed ‘the
messengers of ﬁrm resolve’ for their tenacity in preaching God’s message.The Qur ᾿an 46:35 33047. MUHAMMAD
A Medinan sura that deals with issues of war, those who try to prevent conver-
sion to Islam and the carrying out of God’s commands (a common theme in theMedinan suras), and the fate of the hypocrites. It speci ﬁcally mentions
the iniquity of those who expelled the Prophet from Mecca, it describes thefutility of the disbelievers’ attempts to oppose God and His Prophet, and iturges the Muslims to obey God in all matters, lest their good deeds come tonothing on the Day of Judgement like those of the disbelievers and hypocrites.It takes its title from the mention of Muhammad’s name in verse 2.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1God will bring to nothing the deeds of those who disbelieve and bar
others from the way of God, 2but He will overlook the bad deeds of
those who have faith, do good deeds, and believe in what has beensent down to Muhammad– –the truth from their Lord– –and He willput them into a good state. 3This is because the disbelievers follow
falsehood, while the believers follow the truth from their Lord. Inthis way God shows people their true type.
4When you meet the disbelievers in battle, strike them in the neck,
and once they are defeated, bind any captives ﬁrmly– –later you can
release them by grace
a or by ransom– –until the toils of war have
ended. That [is the way]. God could have defeated them Himself ifHe had willed, but His purpose is to test some of you by means of
others. He will not let the deeds of those who are killed for His cause
come to nothing; 5He will guide them and put them into a good
state; 6He will admit them into the Garden He has already made
known to them. 7You who believe! If you help God, He will help you
and make you stand ﬁrm.
8As for the disbelievers, how wretched will be their state! God has
brought their deeds to nothing. 9It is because they hate what God
has sent down that He has caused their deeds to go to waste. 10Have
they not travelled the earth and seen how those before them mettheir end? God destroyed them utterly: a similar fate awaits the
aCommentators highlight the fact that ‘by grace’ is the ﬁrst of the two options given
here, concluding that this is the preferred or recommended course of action.disbelievers. 11That is because God protects the believers while the
disbelievers have no one to protect them: 12God will admit those who
believe and do good deeds to Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams;
the disbelievers may take their ﬁll of pleasure in this world, and eat
as cattle do, but the Fire will be their home. 13We have destroyed
many a town stronger than your own [Prophet]– – the town which
[chose to] expel you– – and they had no one to help them.
14Can those who follow clear proof from their Lord be compared
to those whose foul deeds are made to seem alluring to them, thosewho follow their own desires? 15Here is a picture of the Garden
promised to the pious: rivers of water forever pure, rivers of milkforever fresh, rivers of wine, a delight for those who drink, rivers ofhoney clari ﬁed and pure, [all] ﬂow in it; there they will ﬁnd fruit of
every kind; and they will ﬁnd forgiveness from their Lord. How can
this be compared to the fate of those stuck in the Fire, givenboiling water to drink that tears their bowels?
16Some of these people listen to you [Prophet], but, once they
leave your presence, they sneer at those who have been givenknowledge, saying, ‘What was that he just said?’ These are the oneswhose hearts God has sealed, those who follow their own desires.17God has increased the guidance of those who follow the right path,
and given them their awareness [of Him]. 18What are the disbelievers
waiting for, other than the Hour which will come upon themunawares? Its signs are already here, but once the Hour has actuallyarrived, what use will it be then to take heed? 19So [Prophet], bear in
mind
a that there is no god but God, and ask forgiveness for your sins
and for the sins of believing men and women. God knows wheneverany of you move, and whenever any of you stay still.
20Those who believe ask why no sura [about ﬁghting] has been
sent down. Yet when a decisive sura [that mentions ﬁghting] is sent
down, you can see the sick at heart looking at you [Prophet] andvisibly fainting at the prospect of death– – better for them 21would be
obedience and ﬁtting words; it would also be better for them to be
true to God when the decision to ﬁght has been made. 22‘If you turn
away now, could it be that you will go on to spread corruption all
over the land and break your ties of kinship?’
b23These are the ones
aLiterally ‘know’.
bA reference to the pretext given, by some who refused to ﬁght, that ﬁghting breaks
ties of kinship.The Qur ᾿an 47:11 332God has rejected, making their ears deaf and their eyes blind. 24Will
they not contemplate the Qur ᾿an? Do they have locks on their hearts?
25Those who turn on their heels after being shown guidance are
duped and tempted by Satan; 26they say to those who hate what God
has sent down, ‘We will obey you in some matters’a– –God knows
their secret schemes.
27How will they feel when the angels take them in death and beat
their faces and their backs 28because they practised things that
incurred God’s wrath, and disdained to please Him? He makes their
deeds go to waste.
29Do the corrupt at heart assume that God will not expose their
malice? 30We could even point them out to you [Prophet] if We
wished, and then you could identify them by their marks, but youwill know them anyway by the tone of their speech. God knowseverything you [people] do. 31We shall test you to see which of you
strive your hardest and are steadfast; We shall test the sincerity ofyour assertions. 32Those who disbelieve, bar others from God’s path,
and oppose the Messenger when they have been shown guidance, donot harm God in any way. He will make their deeds go to waste– –
33believers, obey God and the Messenger: do not let your deeds go to
waste– –34God will not forgive those who disbelieve, bar others from
God’s path, and die as disbelievers.
35So [believers] do not lose heart and cry out for peace. It is you
who have the upper hand: God is with you. He will not begrudgeyou the reward for your [good] deeds: 36the life of this world is only a
game, a pastime, but if you believe and are mindful of God, He willrecompense you. He does not ask you to give up [all] your posses-sions– –37you would be grudging if He were to ask you and press you
for them, and He would bring your ill-will to light– –38though now
you are called upon to give [a little] for the sake of God, some of youare grudging. Whoever is grudging is so only towards himself: God
is the source of wealth and you are the needy ones. He will substitute
other people for you if you turn away, and they will not be like you.
aFor instance, they will agree that Muhammad is not a prophet but will not agree to
idol worship or denial of the Resurrection (Razi).Muhammad 333 47:3848. TRIUMPH
A Medinan sura that takes its title from verse 1 and makes reference to the
occasion when the Prophet had a vision that he and his followers would beperforming pilgrimage to Mecca (verse 27). They set out, but the Meccans
decided to bar them at Hudaybiyya from reaching the town and sent emissariesto have discussions with the Prophet. In the end the Prophet signed a treaty thathe and the believers would not enter Mecca that year, but would do so the nextyear. Seeing the long-term signi ﬁcance of this treaty, in the interests of peace he
agreed to a truce of ten years during which time, if any Meccan went over to hisside, he would return him to the Meccans, but if any of his people went over tothe Meccans, they would not return them. Throughout the sura the Prophetis assured that this treaty that God has given him is a great breakthrough(cf. verses 1–3,18–21,27). The believers are reassured that their self-restraint
and obedience to the Prophet were inspired by God (verses 4–5,24–6). The
sura condemns both the hypocrites in Medina (verse 6) and the idolaters of
Mecca (verses 6 and 26) and closes by praising the believers (verse 29).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Truly We have opened up a path to clear triumph for you [Prophet],
2so that God may forgive you your past and future sins, complete
His grace upon you, guide you to a straight path, 3and help you
mightily. 4It was He who made His tranquillity descend into the
hearts of the believers,a to add faith to their faith– –the forces of
the heavens and earth belong to God; He is all knowing and allwise– – 5so as to admit believing men and women into Gardens
graced with ﬂowing streams, there to remain, absolving their bad
deeds– –a great triumph in God’s eyes– – 6and to torment the hypo-
critical and idolatrous men and women who harbour evil thoughtsabout God
b– –it is they who will be encircled by evil!– –who carry the
burden of God’s anger, whom God has rejected and for whom
He has prepared Hell, an evil destination! 7The forces of heaven
and earth belong to God; He is almighty and all wise. 8We have sent
you [Prophet] to bring good news and to give warning, 9so that you
aWhen they pledged to accept the Prophet’s decision. See verse 18.
bSee verse 12.[people] may believe in God and His Messenger, support Him,
honour Him, and praise Him morning and evening.
10Those who pledge loyalty to you [Prophet] are actually pledg-
ing loyalty to God Himself– – God’s hand is placed on theirsa– –and
anyone who breaks his pledge does so to his own detriment: Godwill give a great reward to the one who ful ﬁls his pledge to Him.
11The desert Arabs who stayed behind will say to you, ‘We were
busy with our property and our families: ask forgiveness for us,’but they say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say,‘Whether it is God’s will to do you harm or good, who can intervenefor you?’ No! God is fully aware of everything you [people] do. 12No!
You thought that the Messenger and the believers would neverreturn to their families and this thought warmed your hearts. Yourthoughts are evil, for you are corrupt people: 13We have prepared a
blazing Fire for those who do not believe in God and His Messenger.14Control of the heavens and earth belongs to God and He forgives
whoever He will and punishes whoever He will: God is most forgiv-
ing and merciful.
15When you [believers] set o ﬀ for somewhere that promises war
gains, those who [previously] stayed behind will say, ‘Let us comewith you.’ They want to change God’s words, but tell them[Prophet], ‘You may not come with us: God has said this before.’They will reply, ‘You begrudge us out of jealousy.’ How little they
understand!
16Tell the desert Arabs who stayed behind, ‘You will be called to
face a people of great might in war and to ﬁght them, unless they
surrender: if you obey, God will reward you well, but if you turnaway, as you have done before, He will punish you heavily– –17the
blind, the lame, and the sick will not be blamed.’ God will admitanyone who obeys Him and His Messenger to Gardens gracedwith ﬂowing streams; He will painfully punish anyone who turns
away.
18God was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance
to you [Prophet] under the tree: He knew what was in their heartsand so He sent tranquillity down to them and rewarded them with aspeedy triumph 19and with many future gains. God is mighty and
wise. 20He has promised you [people] many future gains: He has
aLoyalty was pledged by everybody placing their right hands on top of the Prophet’s.Triumph 335 48:20hastened this gain for you. He has held back the hands of hostile
people from you as a sign for the faithful and He will guide you to astraight path. 21There are many other gains [to come], over which
you have no power. God has full control over them: God has powerover all things.
22If the disbelievers had fought against you, they would have
taken ﬂight and found no one to protect or support them: 23such was
God’s practice in the past and you will ﬁnd no change in God’s
practices. 24In the valley of Mecca it was He who held their hands
back from you and your hands back from them after He gave you
the advantage over them
a– –God sees all that you do. 25They were
the ones who disbelieved, who barred you from the Sacred Mosque,and who prevented the o ﬀering from reaching its place of sacri ﬁce. If
there had not been among them, unknown to you, believing men andwomen whom you would have trampled underfoot, inadvertentlyincurring guilt on their account– – God brings whoever He will into
His mercy– – if the [believers] had been clearly separated, We would
have in ﬂicted a painful punishment on the disbelievers. 26While the
disbelievers had fury in their hearts– – the fury of ignorance– – God
sent His tranquillity down on to His Messenger and the believersand made binding on them [their] promise to obey God,
b for that
was more appropriate and ﬁtting for them. God has full knowledge
of all things.
27God has truly ful ﬁlled His Messenger’s vision: ‘God willing,
you will most certainly enter the Sacred Mosque in safety, shaven-
headed or with cropped hair,c without fear!’– – God knew what you
did not– – and He has granted you a speedy triumph. 28It was He who
sent His Messenger, with guidance and the religion of Truth, for himto show that it is above all [false] religion. God su ﬃces as a witness:
29Muhammad is the Messenger of God.
Those who follow him are harsh towards the disbelievers and
compassionate towards each other. You see them kneeling andprostrating, seeking God’s bounty and His good pleasure: on theirfaces they bear the marks of their prostrations. This is how they arepictured in the Torah and the Gospel: like a seed that puts forth its
aA detachment of eighty Meccan ﬁghters attacked the Prophet’s camp but were
captured. The Prophet released them after the treaty was signed.
bThe promise they made under the tree at Hudaybiyya (see verse 18).
cThese are some of the ﬁnal rites of pilgrimage.The Qur ᾿an 48:21 336shoot, becomes strong, grows thick, and rises on its stem to the
delight of its sowers. So God infuriates the disbelievers throughthem; God promises forgiveness and a great reward to those whobelieve and do righteous deeds.Triumph
337 48:2949. THE PRIVATE ROOMS
This Medinan sura takes its title from the reference to the Prophet’s private
rooms in verse 4. It guides the believers on how to behave with proper respect
towards their leader (verses 1–5), and with mutual respect and trust towards
each other (verses 9–12). The sura stresses the unity of mankind and God’s
intention that people should live together in harmony (verse 13). It criticizes
the desert Arabs for their presumptuous attitude to their faith and to God(verses 14–18).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Believers, do not push yourselves forward in the presence of God
and His Messenger– –be mindful of God: He hears and knows all– –2believers, do not raise your voices above the Prophet’s, do not raise
your voice when speaking to him as you do to one another, or your[good] deeds may be cancelled out without you knowing. 3It is those
who lower their voices in the presence of God’s Messenger whosehearts God has proved to be aware– –they will have forgiveness, and a
great reward– – 4but most of those who shout to you [Prophet] from
outside your private rooms lack understanding. 5It would have
been better for them if they had waited patiently for you to come outto them but God is all forgiving and merciful.
6Believers, if a troublemaker brings you news, check it ﬁrst, in
case you wrong others unwittingly and later regret what you havedone, 7and be aware that it is God’s Messenger who is among you: in
many matters you would certainly su ﬀer if he were to follow your
wishes. God has endeared faith to you and made it beautiful to yourhearts; He has made disbelief, mischief, and disobedience hatefulto you. It is people like this who are rightly guided 8through God’s
favour and blessing: God is all knowing and all wise.
9If two groups of the believers ﬁght, you [believers] should try to
reconcile them; if one of them is [clearly] oppressing the other, ﬁght
the oppressors until they submit to God’s command, then make ajust and even-handed reconciliation between the two of them: Godloves those who are even-handed. 10The believers are brothers, so
make peace between your two brothers and be mindful of God,so that you may be given mercy.11Believers, no one group of men should jeer at another, who may
after all be better than them; no one group of women should jeer atanother, who may after all be better than them; do not speak ill ofone another; do not use o ﬀensive nicknames for one another. How
bad it is to be called a mischief-maker
a after accepting faith! Those
who do not repent of this behaviour are evildoers. 12Believers, avoid
making too many assumptions– – some assumptions are sinful– – and
do not spy on one another or speak ill of people behind their backs:would any of you like to eat the ﬂesh of your dead brother? No, you
would hate it. So be mindful of God: God is ever relenting, most
merciful. 13People, We created you all from a single man and a single
woman, and made you into races and tribes so that you shouldrecognize one another. In God’s eyes, the most honoured of you arethe ones most mindful of Him: God is all knowing, all aware.
b
14The desert Arabs say, ‘We have faith.’ [Prophet], tell them, ‘You
do not have faith. What you should say instead is, “We have sub-mitted,” for faith has not yet entered your hearts.’ If you obey Godand His Messenger, He will not diminish any of your deeds: He ismost forgiving and most merciful. 15The true believers are the ones
who have faith in God and His Messenger and leave all doubtbehind, the ones who have struggled with their possessions and theirpersons in God’s way: they are the ones who are true. 16Say, ‘Do you
presume to teach God about your religion, when God knows every-thing in the heavens and earth, and He has full knowledge of allthings?’ 17They think they have done you [Prophet] a favour by
submitting. Say, ‘Do not consider your submission a favour to me; itis God who has done you a favour, by guiding you to faith, if you aretruly sincere.’ 18God knows the secrets of the heavens and earth: He
sees everything you do.
aThose who cause trouble by doing any of the above actions will have earned the
name of ‘mischief-maker’ (Razi).
bOf people’s true worth and the thoughts they harbour (see also 50:16).339 49:18 The Private Rooms50. QAF
A Meccan sura which deals predominantly with the Resurrection and the Day
of Judgement. Reference is made to previous generations of disbelievers (verses12–14), both to warn the disbelievers in Mecca and to reassure the Prophet.
Creation is cited as an indication of God’s ability to bring the dead to life again(verses 3–11), and emphasis is placed on the powerlessness of man on the Day
of Resurrection (verses 20–30). The sura both opens and closes with mention of
the Qur ᾿an.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Qaf
By the glorious Qur ᾿an!a2But the disbelievers are amazed that a
warner has come from among them and they say, ‘How strange! 3To
come back [to life] after we have died and become dust? That is toofar-fetched.’ 4We know very well what the earth takes away from
them: We keep a comprehensive record. 5But the disbelievers deny
the truth when it comes to them; they are in a state of confusion.6Do they not see the sky above them– –how We have built and
adorned it, with no rifts in it; 7how We spread out the earth and put
solid mountains on it, and caused every kind of joyous plant to growin it, 8as a lesson and reminder for every servant who turns to God;
9and how We send blessed water down from the sky and grow with it
gardens, the harvest grain, 10and tall palm trees laden with clusters
of dates, 11as a provision for everyone; how with water We give [new]
life to a land that is dead? This is how the dead will emerge [fromtheir graves]. 12The people of Noah disbelieved long before these
disbelievers, as did the people of Rass, Thamud, 13 ῾Ad, Pharaoh,
Lot, 14the Forest-Dwellers, Tubba ῾: all of these people disbelieved
their messengers, and so My warning was realized.
15So were We incapable of the ﬁrst creation? No indeed! Yet they
doubt a second creation. 16We created man– –We know what his soul
whispers to him: We are closer to him than his jugular vein– – 17with
aThat which is sworn– –that mankind will be raised from the dead– –is omitted but is
evident from the verses that follow (cf. 37:1;89:1–4).two receptorsa set to record, one on his right side and one on his left:
18he does not utter a single word without an ever-present watcher.
19The trance of death will bring the Truth with it: ‘This is what
you tried to escape.’
20The Trumpet will be sounded: ‘This is the Day [you were]
warned of.’ 21Each person will arrive attended by an [angel] to drive
him on and another to bear witness: 22‘You paid no attention to
this [Day]; but today We have removed your veil and your sight is
sharp.’ 23The person’s attendant will say, ‘Here is what I have pre-
pared’– –24‘Hurlb every obstinate disbeliever into Hell, 25everyone
who hindered good, was aggressive, caused others to doubt, 26and set
up other gods alongside God. Hurl him into severe punishment!’– –
27and his [evil]c companion will say, ‘Lord, I did not make him
transgress; he had already gone far astray himself.’ 28God will say,
‘Do not argue in My presence. I sent you a warning 29and My word
cannot be changed: I am not unjust to any creature.’ 30We shall say to
Hell on that day, ‘Are you full?’ and it will reply, ‘Are there no more?’31But Paradise will be brought close to the righteous and will no
longer be distant: 32‘This is what you were promised– –this is for
everyone who turned often to God and kept Him in mind, 33who
held the Most Gracious in awe, though He is unseen, who comesbefore Him with a heart turned to Him in devotion– –34so enter it in
peace. This is the Day of everlasting Life.’ 35They will have all that
they wish for there, and We have more for them.
36We have destroyed even mightier generations before these
disbelievers, who travelled through [many] lands– – was there any
escape? 37There truly is a reminder in this for whoever has a heart,
whoever listens attentively. 38We created the heavens, the earth, and
everything between, in six Days without tiring. 39So [Prophet], bear
everything they say with patience; celebrate the praise of your Lordbefore the rising and setting of the sun; 40proclaim His praise in the
night and at the end of every prayer;
d41listen out for the Day when
the caller will call from a nearby place. 42They will come out [from
aUsually taken to mean ‘recording angels’.
bThis verb is in the dual, taken to be addressed either to both recording angels, or to
two of the angels who guard Hell.
cCf. 4:38;41:25.
dLiterally ‘prostration’, sujud . This is a ﬁgure of speech in which the part stands for the
whole.Qaf 341 50:42their graves] on that Day, the Day when they hear the mighty blast in
reality. 43It is We who give life and death; the ﬁnal return will be to
Us 44on the Day when the earth will be torn apart, letting them rush
out–– that gathering will be easy for Us. 45We know best what the
disbelievers say. You [Prophet] are not there to force them, soremind, with this Qur ᾿an, those who fear My warning.The Qur ᾿an 50:43 34251. SCATTERING [WINDS]
A Meccan sura that gives several of the signs of nature as proof of the
Resurrection, among them the scattering winds that give the sura its title(verse 1). The disbelievers are reminded of the fate that befell previous rebellious
generations and the Prophet is urged to carry on reminding.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1By those [winds] that scatter far and wide,a2and those that are
heavily laden,b3that speed freely, 4that distribute [rain] as ordained!
5What you [people] are promised is true: 6the Judgement will
come– – 7by the sky with its pathways, 8you di ﬀer in what you say– –
9those who turn away from itc are [truly] deceived. 10Perish the liars,
11those steeped in error and unaware! 12They ask, ‘When is this
Judgement Day coming?’ 13On a Day when they will be punished by
the Fire, 14‘Taste the punishment! This is what you wished to
hasten.’ 15The righteous will be in Gardens with [ ﬂowing] springs.
16They will receive their Lord’s gifts because of the good they did
before: 17sleeping only little at night, 18praying at dawn for God’s
forgiveness, 19giving a rightful share of their wealth to the beggar
and the deprived. 20On earth there are signs for those with sure
faith– – 21and in yourselves too, do you not see?– – 22in the sky is your
sustenance and all that you are promised.d23By the Lord of the
heavens and earth! All this is as real as your speaking.
24[Muhammad], have you heard the story of the honoured guests
of Abraham? 25They went in to see him and said, ‘Peace.’ ‘Peace,’
he said, [adding to himself] ‘These people are strangers.’ 26He
turned quickly to his household, brought out a fat calf, 27and
placed it before them. ‘Will you not eat?’ he said, 28beginning to be
afraid of them, but they said, ‘Do not be afraid.’ They gave him goodnews of a son who would be gifted with knowledge. 29His wife then
entered with a loud cry, struck her face,
e and said, ‘A barren old
aSee15:22; this is a benevolent scattering (unlike the one in 18:45).
bWith rain.cJudgement.
dThe punishment and Final Judgement/Destiny/physical and spiritual sustenance.
eIn her incredulity and embarrassment.woman?’a30but they said, ‘It will be so. This is what your Lord said,
and He is the Wise, the All Knowing.’ 31Abraham said, ‘What is your
errand, messengers?’ 32They said, ‘We are sent to a people lost in sin,
33to bring down rocks of clay, 34marked by your Lord for those who
exceed all bounds.’ 35We brought out such believers as were there– –
36We found only one household devoted to God– –37and left the town
to be a sign for those who fear the painful punishment.
38There is another sign in Moses: We sent him to Pharaoh with
clear authority. 39Pharaoh turned away with his supporters, saying,
‘This is a sorcerer, or maybe a madman,’ 40so We seized him and his
forces and threw them into the sea: he was to blame. 41There is
another sign in the ῾Ad: We sent the life-destroying wind against
them 42and it reduced everything it came up against to shreds. 43And
also in the Thamud: it was said to them, ‘Make the most of your livesfor a while,’ 44but they rebelled against their Lord’s command, so the
blast took them. They looked on helplessly: 45they could not even
remain standing, let alone defend themselves. 46Before that We des-
troyed the people of Noah. They were a truly sinful people! 47We
built the heavens with Our power and made them vast, 48We spread
out the earth– – how well We smoothed it out!– –49and We created
pairs of all things so that you [people] might take note.
50[So, say to them, Prophet], ‘Quickly, turn to God– – I am sent by
Him to give you clear warning– –51and do not set up any other god
alongside Him. I am sent by Him to give you clear warning!’ 52Every
previous people to whom a messenger was sent also said, ‘A sor-cerer, or maybe a madman!’ 53Did they tell one another to do this?
No! They are a people who exceed all bounds, 54so ignore them
[Prophet]– – you are not to blame– –55and go on reminding [people],
it is good for those who believe to be reminded.
56I created jinn and mankind only to worship Me: 57I want no
provision from them, nor do I want them to feed Me– –58God is the
Provider, the Lord of Power, the Ever Mighty. 59The evildoers, like
their predecessors, will have a share of punishment– – they need not
ask Me to hasten it– –60and woe betide those who deny the truth on
the Day they have been promised.
aSee11:72.The Qur ᾿an 51:30 34452. THE MOUNTAIN
A Meccan sura which addresses many of the arguments put to the Prophet by
the disbelievers of Mecca (verses 29–49). The bliss that will be enjoyed by the
believers is contrasted to the torments of Hell, and the Prophet is urged to bidehis time, to continue to deliver his message, and to wait with con ﬁdence for
God’s judgement. God swears by, among other things, Mount Sinai, from whichthe sura takes its title, that the Day of Judgement is inevitable.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1By the mountain,a2by a Scripture inscribed 3in unrolled parch-
ment, 4by the much-visited House,b5by the raised canopy,c6by the
ocean ever ﬁlled, 7[Prophet], your Lord’s punishment is coming– –
8it cannot be put o ﬀ––9on the Day when the sky sways back and
forth 10and the mountains ﬂoat away.d11Woe on that Day to those
who deny the Truth, 12who amuse themselves with idle chatter: 13on
that Day they will be thrust into the Fire of Hell. 14‘This is the Fire
you used to deny. 15So is this sorcery? Do you still not see it? 16Burn
in it– –it makes no di ﬀerence whether you bear it patiently or not– –
you are only being repaid for what you have done.’
17Those who were mindful of God are in Gardens and in bliss,
18rejoicing in their Lord’s gifts: He has saved them from the torment
of the Blaze, 19‘Eat and drink with healthy enjoyment as a reward for
what you have done.’ 20They are comfortably seatede on couches
arranged in rows; We pair them with beautiful-eyed maidens; 21We
unite the believers with their o ﬀspring who followed them in faith– –
We do not deny them any of the rewards for their deeds: each personis in pledge for his own deeds– – 22We provide them with any fruit or
meat they desire. 23They pass around a cup which does not lead to
any idle talk or sin. 24Devoted youths like hidden pearls
f wait on
aMount Sinai, see 95:2;23:20.
bUnderstood to refer to the Ka ῾ba in Mecca.
cThe sky.
dSee27:88.
eIttaka ᾿a means ‘to sit, well supported’ ( al-Mu ῾jam al-Wasit ) (cf. 55:54,76).
fThe choicest pearls were kept hidden for their protection and only removed from
safekeeping on very special occasions.them. 25They turn to one another and say, 26‘When we were still with
our families [on earth] we used to live in fear– – 27God has been
gracious to us and saved us from the torment of intense heat– –28We
used to pray to Him: He is the Good, the Merciful One.’ 29So
[Prophet] remind [people].
By the grace of your Lord [Prophet], you are neither oracle nor
madman. 30Ifa they say, ‘He is only a poet: we shall await his fate,’
31say, ‘Wait if you wish; I too am waiting’– –32does their reason really
tell them to do this, or are they simply insolent people? 33If they say,
‘He has made it up himself ’– – they certainly do not believe– –34let
them produce one like it, if what they say is true. 35Were they created
without any agent? Were they the creators? 36Did they create the
heavens and the earth? No! They do not have faith. 37Do they pos-
sess your Lord’s treasures or have control over them? 38Do they have
a ladder to climb, in order to eavesdrop [on Heaven’s secrets]? Let
their eavesdropper produce clear proof. 39Does God have daughters
while you have sons?b40Do you [Prophet] demand a payment from
them that would burden them with debt? 41Do they have [access to]
the unseen? Could they write it down? 42Do they think they can
ensnare you? It is the disbelievers who have been ensnared. 43Do
they really have another god besides God? God is far above anythingthey set alongside Him.
44Even if they saw a piece of heaven falling down on them,
c they
would say, ‘Just a heap of clouds,’ 45so leave them, Prophet, until
they face the Day when they will be thunderstruck, 46the Day when
their snares will be of no use to them, when they will get no help.47Another punishment awaits the evildoers, though most of them do
not realize it. 48Wait patiently [Prophet] for your Lord’s judgement:
you are under Our watchful eye. Celebrate the praise of your Lordwhen you rise. 49Glorify Him at night and at the fading of the stars.
aEleven verses in this section begin with ‘or’, which is powerful in Arabic argumenta-
tion. The Qur ᾿an surveys all their arguments, one by one, with equal emphasis. Thus it
uses am (‘or’) which indicates equivalence in Arabic. We have omitted the conjunction.
bThis refers to the pagan belief that the angels were the daughters of God and to
their habit of denigrating the birth of their own daughters.
cThe Meccans challenged the Prophet to bring the heavens down on them, if he were
truly God’s Messenger. Cf. 17:92.The Qur ᾿an 52:25 34653. THE STAR
A Meccan sura that con ﬁrms the divine source of the Prophet’s message and
refers to his ascension to heaven during the Night Journey (verses 1–18). The
sura refutes the claims of the disbelievers about the goddesses and the angels(verses 19–28), and the third paragraph lists several truths about God’s power.
The sura closes with a warning of the imminent Day of Judgement.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1By the star when it sets!a2Your companionb has not strayed; he is
not deluded; 3he does not speak from his own desire. 4The Qur ᾿an is
nothing less than a revelation that is sent to him. 5It was taught to
him by [an angel]c with mighty powers 6and great strength, who
stood 7on the highest horizon 8and then approached– –coming down
9until he was two bow-lengths away or even closer– – 10and revealed
to God’s servant what He revealed. 11[The Prophet’s] own heart did
not distort what he saw. 12Are you going to dispute with him what he
saw with his own eyes? 13A second time he saw him: 14by the lote tree
beyond which none may passd15near the Garden of Restfulness,
16when the tree was covered in nameless [splendour].e17His sight
never wavered, nor was it too bold, 18and he saw some of the greatest
signs of his Lord.
19[Disbelievers], consider al-Lat and al- ῾Uzza, 20and the third
one, Manatf––21are you to have the male and He the female? 22That
would be a most unjust distribution!g––23these are nothing but
names you have invented yourselves, you and your forefathers. Godhas sent no authority for them. These people merely follow guess-work and the whims of their souls, even though guidance has come
aSirius, which the Meccans worshipped (cf. verses 49 and 6:76–9).
bMuhammad.
cThis refers to the Angel Gabriel.
dCf. 56:28.
eSomething unimaginable, indescribable.
fNames of Arabian pagan goddesses.
gBecause the pagan Arabs regarded daughters as a humiliation, the Qur ᾿an argues
with them according to their own logic that it was particularly illogical of them toattribute daughters to God. See also 16:57–62;43:16–20.to them from their Lord. 24Is man to have everything he wishes for,a
25when the present life and the life to come belong only to God?
26There are many angels in heaven whose intercession will be of no
use until God gives permission to those He will, whose words Hewill accept. 27Those who deny the life to come give the angels female
names. 28They have no knowledge to base this on: they merely follow
guesswork. Guesswork is of no value against the Truth. 29So
[Prophet] ignore those who turn away from Our revelation, whowant only the life of this world. 30Their knowledge does not go
beyond that. Your Lord knows best who strays from His path andwho follows guidance. 31Everything in the heavens and earth belongs
to God. He will repay those who do evil according to their deeds, andreward, with what is best, those who do good. 32As for those who
avoid grave sins and foul acts, though they may commit small sins,your Lord is ample in forgiveness. He has been aware of you fromthe time He produced you from the earth and from your hidingplaces in your mothers’ wombs, so do not assert your own goodness:
b
He knows best who is mindful of Him.
33[Prophet], consider that man who turned away: 34he only gave a
little and then he stopped. 35Does he have knowledge of the Unseen?
Can he see [the Hereafter]? 36Has he not been told what was written
in the Scriptures of Moses 37and of Abraham, who ful ﬁlled his duty:
38that no soul shall bear the burden of another; 39that man will only
have what he has worked towards; 40that his labour will be seen 41and
that in the end he will be repaid in full for it; 42that the ﬁnal goal is
your Lord; 43that it is He who makes people laugh and weep; 44that it
is He who gives death and life; 45that He Himself created the two
sexes, male and female, 46from an ejected drop of sperm; 47that He
will undertake the second Creation; 48that it is He who gives wealth
and possessions; 49that He is the Lord of Sirius;c50that it was He
who destroyed, in their entirety, ancient ῾Ad 51and Thamud, 52and
before them the people of Noah who were even more unjustand insolent; 53that it was He who brought down the ruined cities
54and enveloped them in the punishment He ordained for them?
55Which then of your Lord’s blessings do you
d deny?
aThe disbelievers claimed that they worshipped their goddesses in order that these
might intercede for them with God, or bring them closer to Him. Cf. 6:94;39:3.
bCf. 32:10;50:4.cThe star worshipped by the pagan Arabs.
dThe man who turned away (verse 33).The Qur ᾿an 53:24 34856This is a warning just like the warnings sent in former times.
57The imminent Hour draws near 58and only God can disclose it.
59Do you [people] marvel at this? 60Why do you laugh instead of
weeping? 61Why do you pay no heed? 62Bow down before God and
worship.The Star 349 53:6254. THE MOON
A Meccan sura dealing mainly with the punishment dealt out to previous
generations of disbelievers. These are presented as a warning to the disbelieversof Mecca, with the refrain ‘Will anyone take heed?’ running throughout thesura. Finally the treatment of the disbelievers on the Day of Judgement iscontrasted to the everlasting bliss the believers will enjoy. The title is taken from
verse 1 and is a reference to the Day of Resurrection.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1The Hour draws near; the moon is split in two.a
2Whenever the disbelievers see a sign, they turn away and say,
‘Same old sorcery!’ 3They reject the truth and follow their own
desires– –everything is recordedb––4although warning tales that
should have restrained them have come down to them– – 5far-reaching
wisdom– –but these warnings do not help: 6so [Prophet] turn away
from them. On the Day the Summoner will summon them to ahorri ﬁc event, 7eyes downcast, they will come out of their graves like
swarming locusts 8rushing towards the Summoner. The disbelievers
will cry, ‘This is a stern day!’
9The people of Noah rejected the truth before them: they rejected
Our servant, saying, ‘He is mad!’ Noah was rebuked, 10and so he
called upon his Lord, ‘I am defeated: help me!’ 11So We opened the
gates of the sky with torrential water, 12burst the earth with gushing
springs: the waters met for a preordained purpose. 13We carried him
along on a vessel of planks and nails 14that ﬂoated under Our
watchful eye, a reward for the one who had been rejected. 15We have
left this
c as a sign: will anyone take heed? 16How [terrible] was My
punishment and [the ful ﬁlment of] My warnings! 17We have made it
easy to learn lessons from the Qur ᾿an: will anyone take heed?
aOne of the signs of the Day of Judgement. The Arabic uses the past tense, as if that
Day were already here, to help the reader/listener imagine how it will be. Some trad-itional commentators hold the view that this describes an actual event at the time of theProphet, but it clearly refers to the end of the world: cf. the same expression withreference to the sky, 55:37;84:1.
bLiterally ‘ ﬁxed’ in the divine records.
c‘This tale’ or ‘this ship’.18The people of ῾Ad also rejected the truth. How [terrible] was My
punishment and [the ful ﬁlment of] My warnings! 19We released a
howling wind against them on a day of terrible disaster; 20it swept
people away like uprooted palm trunks. 21How [terrible] was My
punishment and [the ful ﬁlment of] My warnings! 22We have made it
easy to learn lessons from the Qur ᾿an: will anyone take heed?
23The people of Thamud also rejected the warnings: 24they said,
‘What? A man? Why should we follow a lone man from amongst
ourselves? That would be misguided; quite insane! 25Would a mes-
sage be given to him alone out of all of us? No, he is an insolent liar!’26‘Tomorrow they will know who is the insolent liar, 27for We shall
send them a she-camel to test them: so watch them [Salih] and bepatient. 28Tell them the water is to be shared between them:
a each
one should drink in turn.’ 29But they called their companion, who
took a sword and hamstrung the camel. 30How [terrible] was My
punishment and [the ful ﬁlment of] My warnings! 31We released a
single mighty blast against them and they ended up like a fence-maker’s dry sticks. 32We have made it easy to learn lessons from the
Qur ᾿an: will anyone take heed?
33The people of Lot rejected the warnings. 34We released a stone-
bearing wind against them, all except the family of Lot. We savedthem before dawn 35as a favour from Us: this is how We reward the
thankful. 36He warned them of Our onslaught, but they dismissed
the warning– –37they even demanded his guests from him– – so We
sealed their eyes– – ‘ Taste My [terrible] punishment and [the ful ﬁl-
ment of] My warnings!’– –38and early in the morning a punishment
seized them that still remains– –39‘Taste My [terrible] punishment
and [the ful ﬁlment of] My warnings!’ 40We have made it easy to learn
lessons from the Qur ᾿an: will anyone take heed?
41The people of Pharaoh also received warnings. 42They rejected
all Our signs so We seized them with all Our might and power.
43‘Are your disbelievers
b any better than these? Were you given an
exemption in the Scripture?’ 44Do they perhaps say, ‘We are a great
army and we shall be victorious’? 45Their forces will be routed and
they will turn tail and ﬂee.c46But the Hour is their appointed time– –
aAnd the she-camel (see 26:155).
bOf Mecca.
cThe Prophet repeated this verse at the Battle of Badr.The Moon 351 54:46the Hour is more severe and bitter: 47truly the wicked are misguided
and quite insanea––48on the Day when they are dragged on their
faces in Hell. ‘Feel the touch of Hell.’ 49We have created all things in
due measure; 50when We ordain something it happens at once, in the
blink of an eye; 51We have destroyed the likes of you in the past. Will
anyone take heed?
52Everything they do is noted in their records: 53every action,
great or small, is recorded. 54The righteous will live securely among
Gardens and rivers, 55secure in the presence of an all-powerful
Sovereign.
aSee verse 24 above.The Qur ᾿an 54:47 35255. THE LORD OF MERCY
A Medinan sura that highlights God’s wonders in this world, describes the end
of the world, and paints an evocative picture of the delights of Paradise. Hell isbrieﬂy contrasted (verses 43–4) with the joys that await the righteous. The
sura is characterized by the refrain ‘Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings doyou both deny?’ which runs throughout. The sura divides mankind and jinninto three classes: the disbelievers (verses 41–5), the best of believers (verses
46–61), and the ordinary believers (verses 62–77).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1It is the Lord of Mercy 2who taught the Qur ᾿an.a3He created man
4and taught him to communicate.b5The sun and the moon follow their
calculated courses; 6the plants and the trees submitc to His designs;
7He has raised up the sky. He has set the balance 8so that you may not
exceed in the balance: 9weigh with justice and do not fall short in
the balance. 10He set down the Earth for His creatures, 11with its fruits,
its palm trees with sheathed clusters, 12its husked grain, its fragrant
plants. 13Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you bothd deny?
14He created mankind out of dried clay, like pottery, 15the jinn out
of smokeless ﬁre. 16Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you
both deny?
17He is Lord of the two risings and Lord of the two settings.e
18Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
19He released the two bodies of [fresh and salt] water. They meet,
20yet there is a barrier between them they do not cross. 21Which,
then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
22Pearls come forth from them: large ones, and small, brilliant
ones.f23Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
aOne interpretation is that qur ᾿an here means ‘to read’, cf. 96:1.
bBayan  (communication) involves both expressing oneself and understanding what
has been expressed by others, including the Qur ᾿an, which is called bayan  and mubin .
cSajada  means ‘to submit’ and consequently also ‘to bow down’ or ‘to prostrate
oneself ’.
dMankind and jinn.
eThis refers to the rising and setting of the sun and the moon, or, alternatively, their
furthest points of sunrise and sunset in summer and winter.
fSee Abdel Haleem, Understanding the Qur ᾿an,170–1.24His are the moving ships that ﬂoat, high as mountains, on the
sea. 25Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
26Everyone on earth perishes; 27all that remains is the Facea of
your Lord, full of majesty, bestowing honour. 28Which, then, of your
Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
29Everyone in heaven and earth entreats Him; every day He is at
work.b30Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
31We shall attend to you two huge armiesc [of jinn and mankind].
32Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
33Jinn and mankind, if you can pass beyond the regions of heaven
and earth, then do so: you will not pass without Our authority.
34Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
35Aﬂash of ﬁre and smoke will be released upon you and no one
will come to your aid. 36Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you
both deny?
37When the sky is torn apart and turns crimson, like red hide.
38Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
39On that Day neither mankind nor jinn will be asked about
their sins. 40Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both
deny?
41The guilty will be known by their mark and will be seized
by their foreheads and their feet. 42Which, then, of your Lord’s
blessings do you both deny?
43This is the Hell the guilty deny, 44but they will go round
between its ﬂames and scalding water. 45Which, then, of your Lord’s
blessings do you both deny?
46For those who fear [the time when they will] stand before their
Lord there are two gardens. 47Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings
do you both deny?
48With shading branches. 49Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings
do you both deny?
50With a pair of ﬂowing springs. 51Which, then, of your Lord’s
blessings do you both deny?
52With every kind of fruit in pairs. 53Which, then, of your Lord’s
blessings do you both deny?
aAbdel Haleem, Understanding the Qur ᾿an, ch. 9.
bLiterally ‘in some matter’. The Prophet was asked, ‘What is this matter?’ He
replied, ‘He forgives a sin or removes a distress.’
cThaqal  is a mighty or heavy army: all their forces.The Qur ᾿an 55:24 35454They will sit on couches upholstered with brocade, the fruit
of both gardens within easy reach. 55Which, then, of your Lord’s
blessings do you both deny?
56There will be maidens restraining their glances, untouched
beforehand by man or jinn. 57Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings
do you both deny?
58Like rubies and brilliant pearls. 59Which, then, of your Lord’s
blessings do you both deny?
60Shall the reward of good be anything but good? 61Which, then,
of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
62There are two other gardens below these two.a63Which, then, of
your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
64Both of deepest green. 65Which, then, of your Lord’s blessings
do you both deny?
66With a pair of gushing springs. 67Which, then, of your Lord’s
blessings do you both deny?
68With fruits– – date palms and pomegranate trees. 69Which, then,
of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
70There are good-natured, beautiful maidens. 71Which, then, of
your Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
72Dark-eyed, sheltered in pavilions. 73Which, then, of your Lord’s
blessings do you both deny?
74Untouched beforehand by man or jinn. 75Which, then, of your
Lord’s blessings do you both deny?
76They will all sit on green cushions and ﬁne carpets. 77Which,
then, of your Lord’s blessings do you both deny? 78Blessed is the
name of your Lord, full of majesty, bestowing honour.
aParadise exists in two ranks: the higher level for the truly favoured, and this lower
level described for the less exalted pious. This cosmology of hell, lower paradise, upperparadise is repeated in the following sura: 56:7–56.The Lord of Mercy 355 55:7856. THAT WHICH IS COMING
A Meccan sura whose central message is stated in its opening verses, from which
the sura takes its title: the Day of Judgement is inevitable and it will sortpeople into the humiliated and the richly rewarded. As in the previous sura,people are divided into three classes: those brought near to God (the best of thebelievers), those on the right (the ordinary believers), and those on the left
(the disbelievers). Ample proof is given of God’s power and consequently His
ability to bring about the Resurrection (verses 57–72).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1When that which is coming arrives, 2no one will be able to deny it
has come, 3bringing low and raising high. 4When the earth is shaken
violently 5and the mountains are ground to powder 6and turn to
scattered dust, 7then you will be sorted into three classes. 8Those on
the Right– –what people they are! 9Those on the Left– –what people
they are! 10And those in front– –ahead indeed! 11For these will be the
ones brought nearest to God 12in Gardens of Bliss: 13many from the
past 14and a few from later generations. 15On couches of well-woven
cloth 16they will sit facing each other; 17everlasting youths will go
round among them 18with glasses, ﬂagons, and cups of a pure drink
19that causes no headache or intoxication; 20[there will be] any fruit
they choose; 21the meat of any bird they like; 22and beautiful com-
panions 23like hidden pearls: 24a reward for what they used to
do. 25They will hear no idle or sinful talk there, 26only clean and
wholesomea speech.
27Those on the Right, what people they are! 28They will dwell
amid thornless lote trees 29and clustered acacia 30with spreading
shade, 31constantly ﬂowing water, 32abundant fruits, 33unfailing,
unforbidden, 34with incomparable companionsb35We have specially
created– – 36virginal, 37loving, of matching age– – 38for those on the
Right, 39many from the past 40and many from later generations.
41But those on the Left, what people they are! 42They will dwell
aSalam  is used adjectivally here (Razi). Another interpretation is ‘Peace! Peace!’
bAlternatively ‘couches raised high’. See Razi for both these interpretations.amid scorching wind and scalding water 43in the shadow of black
smoke, 44neither cool nor refreshing. 45Before, they overindulged
in luxury 46and persisted in great sin, 47always saying, ‘What?
When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall wethen be raised up? 48And our earliest forefathers too?’ 49Say
[Prophet], ‘The earliest and latest generations 50will all be gathered
on a predetermined Day 51and you who have gone astray and
denied the truth 52will eat from the bitter tree of Zaqqum, 53ﬁlling
your bellies with it, 54and drink scalding water, 55lapping it like
thirsty camels.’ 56This will be their welcome on the Day of
Judgement.
57It was We who created you: will you not believe? 58Consider
[the semen] you eject– –59do you create it yourselves or are We the
Creator? 60We ordained death to be among you. Nothing could stop
Us 61if We intended to change you and recreate you in a way
unknown to you. 62You have learned how you were ﬁrst created: will
you not re ﬂect? 63Consider the seeds you sow in the ground– –64is it
you who make them grow or We? 65If We wished, We could turn
your harvest into cha ﬀ and leave you to wail, 66‘We are burdened
with debt; 67we are bereft.’ 68Consider the water you drink– –69was it
you who brought it down from the rain-cloud or We? 70If We
wanted, We could make it bitter: will you not be thankful? 71Con-
sider the ﬁre you kindle– –72is it you who make the wood for it grow
or We? 73We made it a reminder, and useful to those who kindle it,
a
74so [Prophet] glorify the name of your Lord, the Supreme.
75I swear by the positions of the stars– –76a mighty oath, if you
only knew– –77that this is truly a noble Qur ᾿an, 78in a protected
Record 79that only the puri ﬁed can touch, 80sent down from the
Lord of all being. 81How can you scorn this statement? 82And how, in
return for the livelihood you are given, can you deny it? 83When the
soul of a dying man comes up to his throat 84while you gaze on– –
85We are nearer to him than you, though you do not see Us– –86why,
if you are not to be judged, 87do you not restore his soul to him, if
what you say is true? 88If that dying person is one of those who will
be brought near to God, 89he will have rest, ease, and a Garden of
Bliss; 90if he is one of those on the Right, 91[he will hear], ‘Peace be
aThis interpretation of muqwin  is supported by Razi. The alternatives to ‘those who
kindle it’ are ‘the desert-dwellers’ or ‘the travellers’.That which is Coming 357 56:91on you,’ from his companions on the Right; 92but if he is one of
those who denied the truth and went astray, 93he will be welcomed
with scalding water. 94He will burn in Hell.
95This is the certain truth: 96[Prophet], glorify the name of your
Lord the Supreme.The Qur ᾿an 56:92 35857. IRON
A Medinan sura that urges the believers to spend in God’s cause and uphold
justice– –the sura takes its title from the iron mentioned in verse 25. The all-
pervasiveness of God’s power, knowledge, control, and glory is a ﬃrmed to
encourage the believers to right action, and the fate of the hypocrites isdescribed. Previous prophets are mentioned (verses 26–7), especially Noah,
Abraham, and Jesus, showing the response they received. The sura closes with a
reference to the People of the Book.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Everything in the heavens and earth glori ﬁes God– –He is the
Almighty, the Wise. 2Control of the heavens and earth belongs to
Him; He gives life and death; He has power over all things. 3He
is the First and the Last;a the Outer and the Inner; He has
knowledge of all things. 4It was He who created the heavens and
earth in six Days and then established Himself on the throne. Heknows what enters the earth and what comes out of it; what descendsfrom the sky and what ascends to it. He is with you wherever youare; He sees all that you do; 5control of the heavens and earth
belongs to Him. Everything is brought back to God. 6He makes
night merge into day and day into night. He knows what is in everyheart.
7Believe in God and His Messenger, and give out of what He has
made pass down to you: those of you who believe and give will have a
great reward. 8Why should you not believe in God when the Mes-
senger calls you to believe in your Lord, and He has already made a
pledge
b with you, if you have faith? 9It is He who has sent down clear
revelations to His Servant, so that He may bring you from the
depths of darkness into light; God is truly kind and merciful to you.10Why should you not give for God’s cause when God alone will
inherit what is in the heavens and earth? Those who gave and foughtbefore the triumph
c are not like others: they are greater in rank than
aTheologians add, ‘without a beginning and without an end’.
bSee7:172.
cThe surrender of Mecca.those who gave and fought afterwards. But God has promised a good
reward to all of them: God is fully aware of all that you do.
11Who will make God a good loan? He will double it for him and
reward him generously. 12On the Day when you [Prophet] see the
believers, both men and women, with their light streaming outahead of them and to their right, [they will be told], ‘The good newsfor you today is that there are Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams
where you will stay: that is truly the supreme triumph!’ 13On the
same Day, the hypocrites, both men and women, will say to thebelievers, ‘Wait for us! Let us have some of your light!’ They will betold, ‘Go back and look for a light.’ A wall with a door will beerected between them: inside it lies mercy, outside lies torment.14The hypocrites will call out to the believers, ‘Were we not with
you?’ They will reply, ‘Yes. But you allowed yourselves to betempted, you were hesitant, doubtful, deceived by false hopesuntil God’s command came– – the Deceiver tricked you about God.
15Today no ransom will be accepted from you or from the
disbelievers: your home is the Fire– – that is where you belong– –a
miserable destination!’
16Is it not time for believers to humble their hearts to the remem-
brance of God and the Truth that has been revealed, and not to belike those who received the Scripture before them, whose time wasextended but whose hearts hardened and many of whom were law-breakers? 17Remember that God revives the earth after it dies; We
have made Our revelation clear to you so that you may use yourreason. 18Charitable men and women who make a good loan to God
will have it doubled and have a generous reward. 19Those who
believe in God and His messengers are the truthful ones who willbear witness before their Lord: they will have their reward and theirlight. But those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations are theinhabitants of Hell. 20Bear in mind that the present life is just a
game, a diversion, an attraction, a cause of boasting among you, ofrivalry in wealth and children. It is like plants that spring up after therain: their growth at ﬁrst delights the sowers, but then you see them
wither away, turn yellow, and become stubble. There is terrible pun-
ishment in the next life as well as forgiveness and approval fromGod; the life of this world is only an illusory pleasure. 21So race for
your Lord’s forgiveness and a Garden as wide as the heavens andearth, prepared for those who believe in God and His messengers:The Qur ᾿an 57:11 360that is God’s bounty, which He bestows on whoever He pleases.
God’s bounty is in ﬁnite.
22No misfortune can happen, either in the earth or in yourselves,
that was not set down in writing before We brought it into being– –
that is easy for God– –23so you need not grieve for what you miss or
gloat over what you gain. 24God does not love the conceited,
the boastful, those who are miserly, and who tell other people to be
miserly. If anyone turns away, remember that God is self-su ﬃcient
and worthy of praise. 25We sent Our messengers with clear signs, the
Scripture and the Balance, so that people could uphold justice: Wealso sent iron, with its mighty strength and many uses for mankind,so that God could mark out those who would help Him and Hismessengers though they cannot see Him.
a Truly God is powerful,
almighty.
26We sent Noah and Abraham, and gave prophethood and
scripture to their o ﬀspring: among them there were some who were
rightly guided, but many were lawbreakers. 27We sent other messen-
gers to follow in their footsteps. After those We sent Jesus, son ofMary: We gave him the Gospel and put compassion and mercy intothe hearts of his followers. But monasticism was something theyinvented– – We did not ordain it for them– – only to seek
b God’s pleas-
ure, and even so, they did not observe it properly. So We gave areward to those of them who believed, but many of them werelawbreakers. 28Believers, be mindful of God and have faith in His
Messenger: He will give you a double share of His mercy; He will
provide a light to help you walk; He will forgive you– – God is most
forgiving, most merciful. 29The People of the Book should know that
they have no power over any of God’s grace and that grace is in the
hand of God alone: He gives it to whoever He will. God’s grace istruly immense.
aThis could apply to God or His helpers.
bAlternatively, ‘only that they should seek’.Iron 361 57:2958. THE DISPUTE
A Medinan sura which disallows a speci ﬁc pagan divorce practice: the sura
takes its title from the dispute referred to in verse 1 between a wife who had been
divorced in this manner and the Prophet. The sura supports the woman. It goeson to state that those who oppose God and His messenger, who secretly allythemselves with Satan, who lie in their oaths and make intrigues against the
Prophet, will be defeated and su ﬀer humiliation both in this world and in
the next (verses 5 and 20), while those on God’s side will triumph (verse 22).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1God has heard the words of the woman who disputed with you
[Prophet] about her husband and complained to God: God has heard
what you both had to say. He is all hearing, all seeing. 2Even if any
of you say to their wives, ‘You are to me like my mother’s back,’a
they are not their mothers; their only mothers are those who gavebirth to them. What they say is certainly blameworthy and false, butGod is pardoning and forgiving. 3Those of you who say such a thing
to their wives, then go back on what they have said, must free a slavebefore the couple may touch one another again– –this is what you arecommanded to do, and God is fully aware of what you do– – 4but
anyone who does not have the means should fast continuously fortwo months before they touch each other, and anyone unable to dothis should feed sixty needy people. This is so that you may [truly]have faith in God and His Messenger. These are the bounds set byGod: grievous torment awaits those who ignore them. 5Those who
oppose God and His Messenger will be brought low, like thosebefore them: We have revealed clear messages, and humiliatingtorment awaits those who ignore them, 6on the Day when God will
raise everyone and make them aware of what they have done. Godhas taken account of it all, though they may have forgotten: Hewitnesses everything.
aThe pagan Arabs used to separate themselves from their wives by saying, ‘You are
to me like my mother’s back,’ which deprived the wife of her marital rights, yet pre-vented her from marrying again. Khawla, daughter of Tha ῾laba, against whom such a
form of divorce was pronounced, complained to the Prophet and he said to her, ‘You areunlawful to him now.’ This revelation came as a result, changing the rule about suchcruel treatment of wives (cf. 33:4).7Do you not see [Prophet] that God knows everything in the
heavens and earth? There is no secret conversation between threepeople where He is not the fourth, nor between ﬁve where He is not
the sixth, nor between less or more than that without Him beingwith them, wherever they may be. On the Day of Resurrection, Hewill show them what they have done: God truly has full knowledgeof everything. 8Have you not seen how those who have been forbid-
den to hold secret conversations go back afterwards and hold them,
and conspire with one another in what is sinful, hostile, and dis-obedient to the Messenger? When they come to you they greet youwith words God has never used to greet you, and say inwardly, ‘Whydoes God not punish us for what we say?’ Hell will be punishmentenough for them: they will burn there– – an evil destination.
9You who believe, when you converse in secret, do not do so in a
way that is sinful, hostile, and disobedient to the Messenger, but in away that is good and mindful [of God]. Be mindful of God, to whomyou will all be gathered. 10[Any other kind of] secret conversation is
the work of Satan, designed to cause trouble to the believers, thoughit cannot harm them in the least unless God permits it. Let thebelievers put their trust in God.
11You who believe, if you are told to make room for one another
in your assemblies, then do so, and God will make room for you,and if you are told to rise up, do so: God will raise up, by manydegrees, those of you who believe and those who have been givenknowledge: He is fully aware of what you do. 12You who believe,
when you come to speak privately with the Messenger, o ﬀer some-
thing in charity before your conversation: that is better for you andpurer. If you do not have the means, God is most forgiving andmerciful.
13Were you afraid
a to give charity before consulting the Prophet?
Since you did not give charity, and God has relented towards you,you should [at least] observe your prayers, pay the prescribed alms,and obey God and His Messenger: God is well aware of your actions.
14Have you not seen [Prophet] those who give their loyalty to
people with whom God is angry? They are neither with you nor with
aAshfaqtum  is in the past tense. There is a lapse of time between verses 12 and 13
during which those who used to plague the Prophet with questions did not comeforward at all, because of having to pay to charity each time. Verse 13 relaxed this
requirement.The Dispute 363 58:14them, and knowingly swear to lies. 15God has prepared a severe
torment for them: what they do is truly evil. 16They have used their
oaths to cover up [their false deeds], and barred others from the pathof God. A humiliating torment awaits them– –17neither their wealth
nor their children will be of any use to them against God– – they will
be the inhabitants of Hell, where they will remain. 18On the Day
God raises them all from the dead, they will swear before Him as
they swear before you now, thinking that it will help them. What liars
they are! 19Satan has gained control over them and made them forget
God. They are on Satan’s side, and Satan’s side will be the losers:20those who oppose God and His Messenger will be among the most
humiliated. 21God has written, ‘I shall most certainly win, I and My
messengers.’ God is powerful and almighty.
22[Prophet], you will not ﬁnd people who truly believe in God and
the Last Day giving their loyalty to those who oppose God and HisMessenger, even though they may be their fathers, sons, brothers, orother relations: these are the people in whose hearts God hasinscribed faith, and whom He has strengthened with His spirit. Hewill let them enter Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams, where they
will stay: God is well pleased with them, and they with Him. Theyare on God’s side, and God’s side will be the one to prosper.The Qur ᾿an 58:15 36459. THE GATHERING [OF FORCES]
A Medinan sura, the bulk of which is taken to refer to the Jewish clan of
Banu al-Nadir, who originally agreed with the Prophet that they would ﬁght
neither for nor against him, yet, after the Meccan defeat of the Muslims in theBattle of Uhud, made an alliance with the Meccans. They also tried to kill theProphet while he was in their area. He asked them to leave and they agreed,
but Ibn Ubayy, the head of the ‘hypocrites’ of Medina, promised them that, if
they fought the Muslims, he and his camp would ﬁght with them (verses 11–
13), and, if they had to leave Medina, he and his camp would leave with
them. Because the Banu al-Nadir had repeatedly broken their agreements,the Muslims besieged them in Medina (in 
ah4/626ce), Ibn Ubayy did not
keep his promise, and the Banu al-Nadir agreed to leave, some going to Syriaand some to Khaybar. In this sura, God stresses that any gains were His doingand so should be distributed in accordance with His instructions (verses6–10). The end of the sura, consequently, emphasizes obedience and awe
towards God (verses 21–4). The sura takes its name from the gathering of
forces in verse 2.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Everything in the heavens and earth glori ﬁes God; He is the
Almighty, the Wise. 2It was He who drove those of the People of the
Book who broke faitha out from their homes at the ﬁrst gathering of
forces– –you [believers] never thought they would go, and they them-selves thought their forti ﬁcations would protect them against God.
God came up on them from where they least expected and put panicinto their hearts: their homes were destroyed by their own hands,and the hands of the believers. Learn from this, all of you withinsight! 3If God had not decreed exile for them, He would have
tormented them [even more severely] in this world. In the Hereafterthey will have the torment of the Fire 4because they set themselves
against God and His Messenger: God is stern in punishmenttowards anyone who sets himself against Him.
5Whatever you [believers] may have done to [their] palm trees– –
cutting them down or leaving them standing on their roots– –was
aThey were unfaithful to their agreements with the Prophet (see the introduction to
this sura).done by God’s leave, so that He might disgrace those who de ﬁed Him.
6You [believers] did not have to spur on your horses or your camels for
whatever gains God turned over to His Messenger from them. Godgives authority to His messengers over whoever He will: God haspower over all things. 7Whatever gains God has turned over to His
Messenger from the inhabitants of the villages belong to God, theMessenger, kinsfolk, orphans, the needy, the traveller in need– – this is
so that they do not just circulate among those of you who are rich– –s o
accept whatever the Messenger gives you, and abstain from whateverhe forbids you. Be mindful of God: God is severe in punishment.
8The poor emigrants who were driven from their homes and pos-
sessions, who seek God’s favour and approval, those who help Godand His Messenger– – these are the ones who are true– – [shall have a
share]. 9Those who were already ﬁrmly established in their homes
[in Medina], and ﬁrmly rooted in faith, show love for those who
migrated to them for refuge and harbour no desire in their hearts forwhat has been given to them. They give them preference over them-selves, even if they too are poor: those who are saved from their ownsouls’ greed are truly successful. 10Those who came after them say,
‘Lord, forgive us our sins and the sins of our brothers who believedbefore us, and leave no malice in our hearts towards those whobelieve. Lord, You are truly compassionate and merciful.’
11Have you [Prophet] considered the hypocrites who say to their
fellows, the faithless among the People of the Book, ‘If you aredriven out, we shall go with you– – we would never listen to anyone
who sought to harm you– – and if you are attacked, we shall certainly
come to your aid’? God bears witness that they are in fact liars: 12if
they are driven out, they will never leave with them; if they areattacked, they will never help them. Even if they did come to theiraid, they would soon turn tail and ﬂee–– in the end they would have
no help. 13Fear of you [believers] is more intense in their hearts than
fear of God because they are people devoid of understanding. 14Even
united they would never ﬁght you, except from within forti ﬁed
strongholds or behind high walls. There is much hostility between
them: you think they are united but their hearts are divided because
they are people devoid of reason. 15Like those who went just before
them,
a they have tasted the result of their conduct and a painful
aThis probably refers to the Banu Qaynuqa, another Jewish tribe banished for their
treachery. It could also refer to the pagans at Badr.The Qur ᾿an 59:6 366punishment awaits them. 16Like Satan, who says to man, ‘Do not
believe!’ but when man disbelieves, says, ‘I disown you; I fear God,the Lord of the Worlds,’ 17both will end up in the Fire, there to
remain. That is the reward of evildoers.
18You who believe! Be mindful of God, and let every soul consider
carefully what it sends ahead for tomorrow; be mindful of God, forGod is well aware of everything you do. 19Do not be like those who
forget God, so God causes them to forget their own souls: they are
the rebellious ones– –20there is no comparison between the inhabit-
ants of the Fire and the inhabitants of Paradise– – and the inhabitants
of Paradise are the successful ones. 21If We had sent this Qur ᾿an
down to a mountain, you [Prophet] would have seen it humbled andsplit apart in its awe of God: We o ﬀer people such illustrations so
that they may re ﬂect.
22He is God: there is no god other than Him. It is He who knows
what is hidden as well as what is in the open, He is the Lord ofMercy, the Giver of Mercy. 23He is God: there is no god other than
Him, the Controller,
a the Holy One, Source of Peace, Granter of
Security, Guardian over all, the Almighty, the Compeller, the TrulyGreat; God is far above anything they consider to be His partner.24He is God: the Creator, the Originator, the Shaper. The best names
belong to Him. Everything in the heavens and earth glori ﬁes Him:
He is the Almighty, the Wise.
aOr King/Sovereign.The Gathering [of Forces] 367 59:2460. WOMEN TESTED
A Medinan sura, revealed between the Treaty of Hudaybiyya and the conquest
of Mecca, which takes its title from verse 10: instructions are given on how to
deal with women who leave Mecca and join the Muslims, and the procedure forwives who leave Medina for Mecca (verses 10–11). The Muslims are instructed
on the appropriate allocation of their loyalties (verses 1–3,7–9,13) and
Abraham is cited for them as an example to learn from (verses 4–6).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1You who believe, do not take My enemies and yours as your allies,
showing them friendship when they have rejected the truth you have
received, and have driven you and the Messenger out simply becauseyou believe in God, your Lord
a– –not if you truly emigrated in
order to strive for My cause and seek My good pleasure. You secretly
show them friendship– –I know all you conceal and all you reveal– –but any of you who do this are straying from the right path. 2If they
gain the upper hand over you, they will revert to being your enemiesand stretch out their hands and tongues to harm you; it is theirdearest wish that you may renounce your faith.
3Neither your kinsfolk nor your children will be any use to you on
the Day of Resurrection: He will separate you out. God sees every-thing you do. 4You have a good example in Abraham and his com-
panions, when they said to their people, ‘We disown you and whatyou worship besides God! We renounce you! Until you believe inGod alone, the enmity and hatred that has arisen between us willendure!’– –except when Abraham said to his father, ‘I will pray forforgiveness for you though I cannot protect you from God’– –[theyprayed] 5‘Lord, we have put our trust in You; we turn to You; You
are our ﬁnal destination. Lord, do not expose us to mistreatment [at
the hands of] the disbelievers. Forgive us, Lord, for You are the
aA Muslim in Medina, Hatib bin Abi Balta ῾a, who had family and property in
Mecca, sent a secret letter to the Meccan leaders telling them that the Prophet waspreparing to march on their town, and warning them to take precautions. The letter wasintercepted, and when the Prophet asked him to explain his action, he said that he onlywanted the Meccans to protect his family and property.Almighty, the All Wise.’ 6Truly, they are a good example for you
[believers] to follow, a good example for those who fear God and theLast Day. If anyone turns away, [remember] God is self-su ﬃcing and
worthy of all praise.
7God may still bring about a ﬀection between you and your pres-
ent enemies– – God is all powerful, God is most forgiving and merci-
ful––8and He does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with
anyone who has not fought you for your faith or driven you out ofyour homes: God loves the just. 9But God forbids you to take as
allies those who have fought against you for your faith, driven you
out of your homes, and helped others to drive you out: any of youwho take them as allies will truly be wrongdoers.
10You who believe, test the believing women when they come to
you as emigrants– – God knows best about their faith– – and if you are
sure of their belief, do not send them back to the disbelievers: theyare not lawful wives for them, nor are the disbelievers their lawfulhusbands. Give the disbelievers whatever bride-gifts they havepaid– – if you choose to marry them, there is no blame on you once
you have paid their bride-gifts– – and do not yourselves hold on to
marriage ties with disbelieving women. Ask for repayment of thebride-gifts you have paid, and let the disbelievers do the same. Thisis God’s judgement: He judges between you, God is all knowing andwise. 11If any of you have wives who leave you for the disbelievers,
and if your community subsequently acquires [gains] from them,then pay those whose wives have deserted them the equivalent ofwhatever bride-gift they paid. Be mindful of God, in whom youbelieve.
12Prophet, when believing women come and pledge to you that
they will not ascribe any partner to God, nor steal, nor commitadultery, nor kill their children, nor lie about who has fathered theirchildren,
a nor disobey you in any righteous thing, then you should
accept their pledge of allegiance and pray to God to forgive them:God is most forgiving and merciful.
13You who believe, do not take as allies those with whom God is
angry: they despair of the life to come as the disbelievers despair ofthose buried in their graves.
aThis is a common interpretation of the idiom ‘what is between their hands and their
feet’ (Razi).Women Tested 369 60:1361. SOLID LINES
A Medinan sura encouraging the believers to stick together in support of God’s
cause (hence the title of the sura, cf. verse 4). It criticizes those who broke their
word (verse 3) and those who argued against the faith (verses 7–8). Moses and
Jesus are cited as examples of prophets whose communities were divided: therebellious were left to stray and the faithful granted success (verses 5–6,14).
The rewards of those who strive in God’s cause are described in some detail(verses 11–13).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Everything in the heavens and earth glori ﬁes God– –He is the
Almighty, the Wise. 2You who believe, why do you say things and
then do not do them?a3It is most hateful to God that you say things
and then do not do them; 4God truly loves those who ﬁght in solid
lines for His cause, like a well-compacted wall.
5Moses said to his people, ‘My people, why do you hurt me when
you know that I am sent to you by God?’ When they went astray,God left their hearts to stray: God does not guide rebellious people.6Jesus, son of Mary, said, ‘Children of Israel, I am sent to you by
God, con ﬁrming the Torah that came before me and bringing good
news of a messenger to follow me whose name will be Ahmad.’
b Yet
when he came to them with clear signs, they said, ‘This is obviouslysorcery.’
7Who could be more wrong than someone who invents lies against
God when called to submit to Him? God does not guide the wrong-doers: 8they wish to put His light out with their mouths. But He will
perfect His light, even though the disbelievers hate it; 9it is He who
sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to showthat it is above all [other] religions, even though the idolaters hate it.
10You who believe, shall I show you a bargain
c that will save you
from painful torment? 11Have faith in God and His Messenger and
struggle for His cause with your possessions and your persons– –that
aSome asked to ﬁght, but when God ordained ﬁghting they failed to do so.
bAhmad, like Muhammad, means ‘praised’ (for his good character).
cLiterally ‘a trade’.is better for you, if only you knew– –12and He will forgive your sins,
admit you into Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams, into pleasant
dwellings in the Gardens of Eternity. That is the supreme triumph.13And He will give you something else that will really please you: His
help and an imminent breakthrough. [Prophet], give the faithful thegood news. 14You who believe, be God’s helpers. As Jesus, son of
Mary, said to the disciples, ‘Who will come with me to help God?’
The disciples said, ‘We shall be God’s helpers.’ Some of the Chil-
dren of Israel believed and some disbelieved: We supported the
believers against their enemy and they were the ones who came out
on top.Solid Lines
371 61:1462. THE DAY OF CONGREGATION
A Medinan sura which takes its title from the instruction to the believers to
observe the Friday prayer promptly and reliably when called (verses 9–11).
The sura reminds the Muslims of God’s grace in granting them a prophetand the chance to grow spiritually (verses 2–4). Those who do not act in
accordance with the knowledge they have been given are criticized (verses5–8).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Everything in the heavens and earth glori ﬁes God, the Controller,
the Holy One, the Almighty, the Wise. 2It is He who raised a mes-
senger, among the people who had no Scripture, to recite His revela-tions to them, to make them grow spiritually and teach them theScripture and wisdom– –before that they were clearly astray– – 3to
them and others yet to join them. He is the Almighty, the Wise:4such is God’s favour that He grants it to whoever He will; God’s
favour is immense. 5Those who have been charged to obey the
Torah, but do not do so, are like asses
a carrying books: how base
such people are who disobey God’s revelations! God does not guidepeople who do wrong.
6Say [Prophet], ‘You who follow the Jewish faith, if you truly
claim that out of all people you alone are friends of God, then youshould be hoping for death.’ 7But because of what they have stored
up for themselves with their own hands they would never hope fordeath– –God knows the wrongdoers very well– – 8so say, ‘The death
you run away from will come to meet you and you will be returned tothe One who knows the unseen as well as the seen: He will tell youeverything you have done.’
9Believers! When the call to prayer is made on the day of
congregation, hurry towards the reminder of God and leave o ﬀ your
trading– –that is better for you, if only you knew– – 10then when the
prayer has ended, disperse in the land and seek out God’s bounty.Remember God often so that you may prosper. 11Yet they scatter
aLiterally ‘an ass’, but the plural English construction requires the plural.towards trade or entertainment whenever they observe it, and leave
you [Prophet] standing there.a Say, ‘God’s gift is better than any
entertainment or trade: God is the best provider.’
aThis refers to two occasions. During congregational prayers at a time of famine, a
caravan arrived and some of the worshippers rushed out, leaving the Prophet standingon the minbar  (pulpit). On another occasion, worshippers rushed out because there was
a band playing for a wedding.The Day of Congregation 373 62:1163. THE HYPOCRITES
A Medinan sura which warns the believers about the treachery of the hypo-
crites and describes their behaviour in some detail. A speci ﬁc occasion on which
the hypocrites tried to stop anyone donating money to believers is described(verses 7–8) and God calls on the Muslims to compensate for this by giving more
of their own funds to the needy (verses 9–11).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1When the hypocrites come to you [Prophet], they say, ‘We bear
witness that you are the Messenger of God.’ God knows that youtruly are His Messenger and He bears witness that the hypocritesare liars– – 2they use their oaths as a cover and so bar others from
God’s way: what they have been doing is truly evil– – 3because they
professed faith and then rejected it, so their hearts have beensealed and they do not understand. 4When you see them
[Prophet], their outward appearance pleases you; when they speak,
you listen to what they say. But they are like propped-up tim-
bers– –they think every cry they hear is against them– –and theyare the enemy. Beware of them. May God confound them! Howdevious they are!
5They turn their heads away in disdain when they are told,
‘Come, so that the Messenger of God may ask forgiveness foryou,’ and you see them walking away arrogantly. 6It makes no dif-
ference whether you ask forgiveness for them or not, God will notforgive them: God does not guide such treacherous people. 7They
are the ones who say, ‘Give nothing to those who follow God’sMessenger, until they abandon him’, but to God belong thetreasures of the heavens and earth, though the hypocrites do notunderstand this. 8They say, ‘Once we return to Medina the power-
ful will drive out the weak,’ but power belongs to God, to HisMessenger, and to the believers, though the hypocrites do not
know this.
9Believers, do not let your wealth and your children distract you
from remembering God: those who do so will be the ones who lose.10Give out of what We have provided for you, before death comes toone of you and he says, ‘My Lord, if You would only reprieve me
for a little while, I would give in charity and become one of therighteous.’ 11God does not reprieve a soul when its turn comes: God
is fully aware of what you do.The Hypocrites
375 63:1164. MUTUAL NEGLECT
A Medinan sura that gets its title from verse 9. The sura opens with a descrip-
tion of God’s power, wisdom, and knowledge (verses 1–4). The disbelievers are
reminded of the end of those who disbelieved before them (verses 5–6), and
their denial of the Resurrection is strongly refuted (verse 7). The believers are
urged to be wary but forgiving of the enemies they may have within their ownfamilies (verses 14–15) and warned to remain steadfast and to spend in God’s
cause (verses 8–10,16–18).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Everything that is in the heavens and earth glori ﬁes God; all control
and all praise belong to Him; He has power over everything. 2It is He
who created you, yet some of you disbelieve and some believe: Godsees everything you do. 3He created the heavens and earth for a true
purpose; He formed you and made your forms good: you will allreturn to Him. 4He knows what is in the heavens and earth; He
knows what you conceal and what you reveal; God knows very wellthe secrets of every heart.
5[Disbelievers], have you not heard about those who disbelieved
before you? They tasted the evil consequences of their conduct, anda painful torment awaits them. 6That is because their messengers
came to them with clear signs, yet they said, ‘Should we take guid-ance from mere mortals?’, rejected the message, and turned away. ButGod had no need for them: He is all su ﬃcient, worthy of all praise.
7The disbelievers claim they will not be raised from the dead. Say
[Prophet], ‘Yes indeed! I swear by my Lord! You will be raised andthen you will be informed about everything you have done: an easymatter for God.’
8So believe in God, in His Messenger, and in the light
a We have
sent down: God is fully aware of what you do. 9When He gathers
you for the Day of Gathering, the Day of mutual neglect,b He will
aThe Qur ᾿an.
bThe Arabic taghabun  is reciprocal from ghabina , ‘to neglect or forget’. Everyone
will be so preoccupied with their own fate that they will neglect everyone else(cf. 70:10–11;80:34–7).cancel the sins of those who believed in Him and acted righteously:
He will admit them into Gardens graced with ﬂowing streams,
there to remain for ever– – the supreme triumph. 10But those who
disbelieved and rejected Our signs will be the inhabitants of the Fire,there to remain– – a miserable destination.
11Misfortunes can only happen with God’s permission
a– –He will
guide the heart of anyone who believes in Him: God knows allthings– – 12so obey God and the Messenger. If you turn away,
remember that Our Messenger’s duty is only to make plain his
message. 13God! There is no god but Him, so let the faithful put
their trust in Him. 14Believers, even among your spouses and your
children you have some enemies– – beware of them– – but if you
overlook their o ﬀences, forgive them, pardon them, then God is all
forgiving, all merciful.
15Your wealth and your children are only a test for you. There is
great reward with God: 16be mindful of God as much as you can;
hear and obey; be charitable– – it is for your own good. Those who are
saved from their own meanness will be the prosperous ones: 17if you
make a generous loan to God He will multiply it for you and forgiveyou. God is ever thankful and forbearing; 18He knows the unseen, as
well as the seen; He is the Almighty, the Wise.
aAbu Muslim gives the explanation that some of the believers’ families tried to
dissuade them from emigrating and from jihad  because they feared for their safety
(Razi). See verse 14.Mutual Neglect 377 64:1865. DIVORCE
A Medinan sura that outlines regulations concerning divorce (verses 1–7). The
sura strongly urges people to observe God’s regulations and guidance. Toreinforce this they are reminded of the fate of earlier disobedient peoples and therewards of the obedient. God’s power and knowledge are emphasized at the end(verse 12).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Prophet, when any of you intend to divorce women, do so at a time
when their prescribed waiting period can properly start,a and calcu-
late the period carefully: be mindful of God, your Lord. Do not drive
them out of their homes– –nor should they themselves leave– –unless
they commit a ﬂagrant indecency. These are the limits set by God– –
whoever oversteps God’s limits wrongs his own soul– –for youcannot know what new situation God may perhaps bring about.
2When they have completed their appointed term, either keep
them honourably, or part with them honourably. Call two just wit-nesses from your people and establish witness for the sake of God.Anyone who believes in God and the Last Day should heed this:God will ﬁnd a way out for those who are mindful of Him, 3and will
provide for them from an unexpected source; God will be enough forthose who put their trust in Him. God achieves His purpose; Godhas set a due measure for everything.
4If you are in doubt, the period of waiting will be three months for
those women who have ceased menstruating and for those who havenot [yet] menstruated; the waiting period of those who are pregnantwill be until they deliver their burden: God makes things easy forthose who are mindful of Him. 5This is God’s command, which He
has sent down to you. God will wipe out the sinful deeds andincrease the rewards of anyone who is mindful of Him.
6House the wives you are divorcing according to your means,
wherever you house yourselves, and do not harass them so as tomake their lives di ﬃcult. If they are pregnant, maintain them
aThe waiting period starts properly after menstruation and before intercourse is
resumed, and lasts for three menstrual cycles.until they are delivered of their burdens; if they suckle your infants,
pay them for it. Consult together in a good way– – if you make
diﬃculties for one another, another woman may suckle the child for
the fathera––7and let the wealthy man spend according to his wealth.
But let him whose provision is restricted spend according to whatGod has given him: God does not burden any soul with more thanHe has given it– – after hardship, God will bring ease.
8Many a town that insolently opposed the command of its Lord
and His messengers We have brought sternly to account: Wepunished them severely 9to make them taste the ill e ﬀect of their
conduct– – the result of their conduct was ruin. 10God has prepared a
severe torment for them.
So, you who have understanding, you who believe, beware of God.
He has sent you the Qur ᾿an 11and a messenger– – reciting to you
God’s revelations that make things clear– – to bring those who believe
and do righteous deeds from darkness into light. God will admitthose who believe in Him and do righteous deeds into Gardens
graced with ﬂowing streams, where they will remain for ever– –H e
has made good provision for them.
12It is God who created seven heavens and a similar [number]
of earths. His command
b descends throughout them. So you should
realize that He has power over all things and that His knowledgeencompasses everything.
aIn Islamic law it is the father’s responsibility to pay for his child to be fed.
bOr ‘His revelation’.Divorce 379 65:1266. PROHIBITION
A Medinan sura that discusses episodes in the Prophet’s home life. It chides
two of the Prophet’s wives for an incident when a con ﬁdence was betrayed
(verses 3–5) and urges all believers to submit themselves to God and to guard
themselves and their families against Hell ﬁre (verses 6–8). The sura closes by
giving examples of believing and disbelieving women (verses 10–12).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Prophet, why do you prohibit what God has made lawful to youa in
your desire to please your wives? Yet God is forgiving and merciful:2He has ordained a way for you [believers] to release you from [such]
oaths
b– –God is your helper: He is the All Knowing, the Wise.
3The Prophet told something in con ﬁdence to one of his wives.
When she disclosed it [to another wife] and God made this known tohim, he con ﬁrmed part of it, keeping the rest to himself. When
he confronted her with what she had done, she asked, ‘Who told youabout this?’ and he replied, ‘The All Knowing, the All Aware toldme.’ 4If both of you [wives] repent to God– –for your hearts have
deviated– –[all will be well]; if you collaborate against him, [bewarned that] God will aid him, as will Gabriel and all righteousbelievers, and the angels too will back him. 5His Lord may well
replace you with better wives if the Prophet decides to divorce any ofyou: wives who are devoted to God, true believers, devout, who turnto Him in repentance and worship Him, given to fasting, whetherpreviously married or virgins.
6Believers, guard yourselves and your families against a Fire
fuelled by people and stones, over which stand angels, stern andstrong; angels who never disobey God’s commands to them, but doas they are ordered: 7‘You who disbelieve, make no excuses today:
you are only being repaid for what you used to do.’
8Believers, turn to God in sincere repentance. Your Lord may well
aThe Prophet had made an oath to abstain from something: either honey or conjugal
relations with one or more of his wives. Razi gives several stories to explain this.
bSee5:89. If a Muslim swears an oath which may be counter to what is right, he is
allowed release, provided he gives expiation.cancel your bad deeds for you and admit you into Gardens graced
with ﬂowing streams, on a Day when God will not disgrace the
Prophet or those who have believed with him. With their lightsstreaming out ahead of them and to their right, they will say, ‘Lord,perfect our lights for us and forgive us: You have power overeverything.’
9Prophet, strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites.
Deal with them sternly. Hell will be their home, an evil destination!10God has given examples of disbelievers: the wives of Noah and Lot
who married two of Our righteous servants but betrayed them.
Their husbands could not help them against God: it was said, ‘Bothof you enter the Fire with the others.’ 11God has also given examples
of believers: Pharaoh’s wife, who said, ‘Lord, build me a house near
You in the Garden. Save me from Pharaoh and his actions; save mefrom the evildoers,’ 12and Mary, daughter of ῾Imran. She guarded
her chastity, so We breathed into her from Our spirit. She acceptedthe truth of her Lord’s words and Scriptures: she was truly devout.Prohibition
381 66:1267. CONTROLa
A Meccan sura that challenges the disbelievers with declarations of God’s
total power over them, and everything else, in this world and the next.It describes the regret the disbelievers will express on the Day of Resurrection(verses 9–10,27).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Exaltedb is He who holds all control in His hands; who has power
over all things; 2who created death and lifec to test you [people] and
reveal which of you does best– –He is the Mighty, the Forgiving;3who created the seven heavens, one above the other. You will not see
any ﬂaw in what the Lord of Mercy creates. Look again! Can you see
any ﬂaw? 4Look again! And again! Your sight will turn back to you,
weak and defeated.
5We have adorned the lowest heaven with lamps and made them
[missiles] for stoning devils
d for whom We have also prepared the
torment of a blazing ﬁre. 6For those who defy their Lord We have
prepared the torment of Hell: an evil destination. 7They will hear it
drawing in its breath when they are thrown in. It blazes forth,8almost bursting with rage. Its keepers will ask every group that is
thrown in, ‘Did no one come to warn you?’ 9They will reply, ‘Yes, a
warner did come to us, but we did not believe him. We said, “Godhas revealed nothing: you are greatly misguided”.’ 10They will say,
‘If only we had listened, or reasoned, we would not be with theinhabitants of the blazing ﬁre,’ and 11they will confess their sins.
Away with the inhabitants of the blazing ﬁre! 12But there is forgive-
ness and a great reward for those who fear their Lord though theycannot see Him.
13Whether you keep your words secret or state them openly, He
knows the contents of every heart. 14How could He who created not
know His own creation, when He is the Most Subtle, the All Aware?15It is He who has made the earth manageable for you– –travel its
aOr ‘Sovereignty’.
bThis meaning of tabarak  is supported by Razi and is more appropriate here than
‘blessed’.
cCf. 40:10,2:28,53:44,2:155.dCf. 37:6–10.regions; eat His provision– – and to Him you will be resurrected.
16Are you sure that He who is in Heaven will not make the earth
swallow you up with a violent shudder? 17Are you sure that He who
is in Heaven will not send a whirlwind to pelt you with stones?
You will come to know what My warning means. 18Those who
went before them also disbelieved– – how terrible was My condemna-
tion! 19Do they not see the birds above them spreading and closing
their wings? It is only the Lord of Mercy who holds them up: Hewatches over everything. 20What force can help you if the Lord of
Mercy does not? The disbelievers are truly deluded. 21Who can
provide for you if He withholds His provision? Yet they persist intheir insolence and their avoidance of the Truth. 22Who is better
guided: someone who falls on his face, or someone who walks
steadily on a straight path?
23Say [Prophet], ‘It is He who brought you into being, He who
endowed you with hearing, sight, and understanding– – what small
thanks you give!’ 24Say, ‘It is He who scattered you throughout the
earth, He to whom you will be gathered.’ 25They say, ‘If what you
say is true, when will this promise be ful ﬁlled?’ 26Say, ‘God alone has
knowledge of this: my only duty is to give clear warning.’ 27When
they see it close at hand, the disbelievers’ faces will be gloomy, and it
will be said, ‘This is what you were calling for.’ 28Say, ‘Just think– –
regardless of whether God destroys me and my followers
a or has
mercy on us– – who will protect the disbelievers from an agonizing
torment?’ 29Say, ‘He is the Lord of Mercy; we believe in Him; we
put our trust in Him. You will come to know in time who is inobvious error.’ 30Say, ‘Just think: if all your water were to sink deep
into the earth who could give you ﬂowing water in its place?’
aReports state that the Meccans were hoping that the Prophet would die, so that they
could be rid of him once and for all.Control 383 67:3068. THE PEN
An early Meccan sura that deals with the accusation that Muhammad was not
God’s Messenger but merely mad (verses 2–6). The arrogance of those who
assume that, because they have some of the good things in this life, they canreject the Revelation, is rebutted (verses 10–16). Examples are given of those who
came to regret their arrogance (verses 17–33). The Prophet is urged to remain
steadfast (verses 48–52).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Nun
By the pen! By all they write!a2Your Lord’s graceb does not make
you [Prophet] a madman: 3you will have a never-ending reward– –
4truly you have a strong character– – 5and soon you will see, as will
they, 6which of you is a ﬄicted with madness. 7Your Lord knows best
who strays from His path and who is rightly guided. 8So do not yield
to those who deny the truth– – 9they want you to compromise with
them and then they will compromise with you– – 10do not yield to any
contemptible swearer, 11to any backbiter, slander-monger, 12or hin-
derer of good, to anyone who is sinful, aggressive, 13coarse, and on
top of all that, an imposter.c14Just because he has wealth and sons,
15when our revelations are recited to him, he says, ‘These are just
ancient fables.’ 16We shall brand him on the snout!
17We have tried them as We tried the owners of a certain garden,
who swore that they would harvest its fruits in the morning 18and
made no allowance [for the Will of God]:d19a disaster from your
Lord struck the garden as they slept 20and by morning it was
aThis could refer to the angels and what they write down of people’s deeds or to the
generic pen and what people write, thus swearing by the ability to write with which Godendowed human beings. Cf. 96:4–5.
bReceiving God’s revelation. See esp. 15:6 for the accusation of madness, which
occurs countless times with reference to various prophets in the Qur ᾿an. Another inter-
pretation is ‘by God’s grace . . .’.
cThis is said to refer to al-Walid ibn al-Mughira, a staunch opponent of the Prophet.
dOr ‘[for the poor]’.stripped bare, a desolate land. 21Still they called each other at day-
break, 22‘Go early to your ﬁeld if you wish to gather all its fruits,’
23and went o ﬀ, whispering, 24‘Make sure no poor person enters the
garden today!’– – 25they left early, bent on their purpose– –26but when
they saw the garden, they said, ‘We must have lost our way! 27No––
we are ruined!’ 28The wisest of them said, ‘Did I not say to you,
“Will you not glorify God?”’– – 29they said, ‘Glory be to God, Our
Lord! Truly, we were doing wrong!’– –30and then they turned to each
other in mutual reproach. 31They said, ‘Alas for us! We have done
terrible wrong, 32but maybe our Lord will give us something better
in its place: we truly turn to Him in hope.’ 33Such is the punishment
[in this life], but greater still is the punishment in the Hereafter, ifonly they knew.
34There will be Gardens of bliss for those who are mindful of
God. 35Should We treat those who submit to Us as We treat those
who do evil? 36What is the matter with you? On what basis do you
judge? 37Do you have a Scripture that tells you 38that you will be
granted whatever you choose? 39Have you received from Us solemn
oaths, binding to the Day of Resurrection, that you will get whateveryou yourselves decide? 40Ask them [Prophet] which of them will
guarantee this. 41Do they have ‘partners’ [besides God]? Let them
produce their ‘partners’, if what they say is true. 42On the Day when
matters become dire,
a they will be invited to prostrate themselves
but will be preventedb from doing so, 43and their eyes will be down-
cast and they will be overwhelmed with shame: they were invited toprostrate themselves when they were safe [but refused].
44So [Prophet] leave those who reject this revelation to Me: We
shall lead them on, step by step, in ways beyond their knowledge; 45I
will allow them more time, for My plan is powerful. 46Do you
demand some reward from them that would burden them with debt?47Do they have knowledge of the unseen that enables them to write it
down? 48Wait patiently [Prophet] for your Lord’s judgement: do not
be like the man in the whale who called out in distress: 49if his Lord’s
grace had not reached him, he would have been left, abandoned andblameworthy, on the barren shore, 50but his Lord chose him and
aThis is the meaning of the Arabic expression ‘when shins are bared’.
bBaydawi suggests that this is because the time for obedience is over, or because they
are somehow unable to do so ( Tafsir ).The Pen 385 68:50made him one of the Righteous. 51The disbelievers almost strike you
down with their looks when they hear the Qur ᾿an. They say, ‘He
must be mad!’ 52but truly it is nothing other than a Reminder for all
peoples.The Qur ᾿an 386 68 :5169. THE INEVITABLE HOUR
A Meccan sura that describes punishment in this life (verses 4–12) and the next
(verses 13–18). The bliss to be enjoyed by the believers is eloquently contrasted
with the torments of hell (verses 19–37). From verse 38 onwards, God a ﬃrms
the Truth of the Qur ᾿an and the Prophet.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1The Inevitable Hour! 2What is the Inevitable Hour? 3What will
explain to you what the Inevitable Hour is?
4The people of Thamud and ῾Ad denied that the crashing blowa
would come: 5Thamud was destroyed by a deafening blast; 6 ῾Ad was
destroyed by a furious wind 7that God let loose against them for
seven consecutive nights, eight consecutive days, so that you couldhave seen its people lying dead like hollow palm-trunks. 8Can you
see any trace of them now? 9Pharaoh, too, and those before him, and
the ruined cities: these people committed grave sins and disobeyedthe messenger of their Lord, so He seized them with an ever-tightening grip. 10But when the Flood rose high, 11We saved you in
theﬂoating ship, 12making that event a reminder for you: attentive
ears may take heed.
13When the Trumpet is sounded a single time, 14when the earth
and its mountains are raised high and then crushed with a singleblow, 15on that Day the Great Event will come to pass. 16The sky will
be torn apart on that Day, it will be so frail. 17The angels will be on
all sides of it and, on that Day, eight of them will bear the throne ofyour Lord above them. 18On that Day you will be brought to judge-
ment and none of your secrets will remain hidden. 19Anyone who is
given his Record in his right hand will say, ‘Here is my Record, readit. 20I knew I would meet my Reckoning,’ 21and so he will have a
pleasant life 22in a lofty Garden, 23with clustered fruit within his
reach. 24It will be said, ‘Eat and drink to your heart’s content as a
reward for what you have done in days gone by.’ 25But anyone who is
given his Record in his left hand will say, ‘If only I had never been
aCf. the sura of this name (Sura 101).given any Record 26and knew nothing of my Reckoning. 27How I
wish death had been the end of me. 28My wealth has been no use to
me, 29and my power has vanished.’ 30‘Take him, put a collar on him,
31lead him to burn in the blazing Fire, 32and [bind him] in a chain
seventy metresa long: 33he would not believe in Almighty God, 34he
never encouraged feeding the hungry, 35so today he has no real
friend here, 36and the only food he has is the ﬁlth 37that only sinners
eat.’
38So I swear by what you can see 39and by what you cannot see:
40this [Qur ᾿an] is the speech of an honoured messenger, 41not the
words of a poet– – how little you believe!– –42nor the words of a sooth-
sayer– – how little you re ﬂect! 43This [Qur ᾿an] is a message sent down
from the Lord of the Worlds: 44if [the Prophet] had attributed some
fabrication to Us, 45We would certainly have seized his right hand
46and cut o ﬀ his lifeblood,b47and none of you could have defended
him. 48This [Qur ᾿an] is a reminder for those who are aware of God.
49We know that some of you consider it to be lies– –50this will be a
source of bitter regret for the disbelievers– –51but it is in fact the
certain Truth. 52So [Prophet] glorify the name of your Lord, the
Almighty.
aAdhira ῾ is an arm’s-length.
bLiterally ‘artery’.The Qur ᾿an 69:26 38870. THE WAYS OF ASCENT
A Meccan sura that describes the Day of Judgement (verses 8–18). One of the
opponents of the Prophet challenged him to hasten the punishment they hadbeen threatened with (verse 1), so the foolishness of the disbelievers in denying
the Resurrection (verse 6) is exposed (verses 36–44). The people who will be
granted the Garden are described (verses 22–35). The title is a reference to the
paths through which angels ascend to God, mentioned in verses 3–4.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1A man [mockingly] demanded the punishment. 2It will fall on the
disbelievers– –none can de ﬂect it– – 3from God, the Lord of the Ways
of Ascent, 4by which the angels and the Spirit ascend to Him, on a
Day whose length is ﬁfty thousand years. 5So be patient, [Prophet],
as be ﬁts you. 6The disbelievers think it is distant, 7but We know it to
be close. 8On a Day when the heavens will be like molten brass 9and
the mountains like tufts of wool, 10when no friend will ask about his
friend, 11even when they are within sight of one another. The guilty
person will wish he could save himself from the su ﬀering of that Day
by sacri ﬁcing his sons, 12his spouse, his brother, 13the kinsfolk who
gave him shelter, 14and everyone on earth, if it could save him. 15But
no! There is a raging ﬂame 16that strips away the skin, 17and it will
claim everyone who rejects the truth, turns away, 18amasses wealth
and hoards it.
19Man was truly created anxious: 20he is fretful when misfortune
touches him, 21but tight- ﬁsted when good fortune comes his way.
22Not so those who pray 23and are constant in their prayers; 24who
give a due share of their wealth 25to beggars and the deprived;
26who believe in the Day of Judgement 27and fear the punishment of
their Lord– – 28none may feel wholly secure from it– – 29who guard
their chastity 30from all but their spouses or their slave-girls– –there
is no blame attached to [relations with] these, 31but those whose
desires exceed this limit are truly transgressors– – 32who are faithful
to their trusts and their pledges; 33who give honest testimony 34and
are steadfast in their prayers. 35They will be honoured in Gardens of
bliss.36What is wrong with the disbelievers? Why do they rush to peer
at you [Prophet], 37from right and left, in crowds? 38Does every one
of them expect to enter a Garden of bliss? 39No! We created them
from the substance they know,a40and, by the Lord of every sunrise
and sunset, We have the power 41to substitute for them others better
than they are– – nothing can prevent Us from doing this. 42So leave
them to wallow in idle talk, until they come face to face with theirpromised Day, 43the Day they will rush out of their graves as if
rallying to a ﬂag, 44eyes downcast and covered in shame: that is the
Day of which they were warned.
aThey deny the Resurrection, and this points out to them that God has the power to
create them from such a small beginning and that He can bring about the Resurrection.Cf. 56:56–62.The Qur ᾿an 70:36 39071. NOAH
A Meccan sura giving further details of the life of Noah before the Flood, to
encourage the Prophet and warn the disbelievers.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1We sent Noah to his people: ‘Warn your people, before a painful
punishment comes to them.’ 2And so he said, ‘My people, I am here
to warn you plainly. 3Serve God, be mindful of Him and obey me.
4He will forgive you your sins and spare you until your appointed
time– –when God’s appointed time arrives it cannot be postponed. If
only you understood!’
5He said, ‘My Lord, I have called my people night and day, 6but
the more I call them, the further they run away: 7every time I call
them, so that You may forgive them, they thrust their ﬁngers into their
ears, cover their heads with their garments, persist in their rejection,and grow more insolent and arrogant. 8I have tried calling them
openly. 9I have tried preaching to them in public and speaking to
them in private. 10I said, “Ask forgiveness of your Lord: He is ever
forgiving. 11He will send down abundant rain from the sky for you;
12He will give you wealth and sons; He will provide you with gardens
and rivers. 13What is the matter with you? Why will you not fear
God’s majesty, 14when He has created you stage by stage?
a15Have
you ever wondered how God created seven heavens, one above theother, 16placed the moon as a light in them and the sun as a lamp,
17how God made you spring forth from the earth like a plant, 18how
He will return you into it and then bring you out again, 19and how
He has spread the Earth out for you 20to walk along its spacious
paths?” ’
21Noah said, ‘My Lord, they have disobeyed me and followed
those whose riches and children only increase their ruin; 22who have
made a grand plan, 23saying, “Do not renounce your gods! 24Do not
renounce Wadd, Suwa ῾, Yaghuth, Ya ῾uq, or Nasr!”
b They have led
aSee22:5;23:12–15.
bNames of idols.many astray. Lord, bring nothing but destructiona down on the
evildoers!’
25They were drowned and sent to Hell for their evildoings: they
found no one to help them against God. 26And Noah said, ‘Lord, do
not leave any of the disbelievers on the earth– –27if you leave them
they will lead Your servants astray and beget only sinners and dis-believers– –28Lord, forgive me, my parents, and whoever enters my
house as a believer. Forgive believing men and women but bringnothing but ruin down on the evildoers!’
aSeeal-Mu ῾jam al-Wasit  for this meaning of dalal .The Qur ᾿an 71:25 39272. THE JINNa
A Meccan sura that gives an account of what a group of jinn said when they
overheard a recitation of the Qur ᾿an and realized its truth (verses 1–15). This
is a lesson to the Meccan Arabs, who are also told that the Prophet can helpthem only by delivering the Message– –God is the All Powerful One (verses16–28). The disbelievers are threatened with what they will meet on the Day
of Judgement (verses 23–7).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Say [Prophet], ‘It has been revealed to me that a group of jinn once
listened in and said, “We have heard a wondrous Qur ᾿an, 2that gives
guidance to the right path, and we have come to believe it– –We shallnever set up partners with our Lord– – 3and that He– –exalted be the
glory of our Lord!– –has neither spouse nor child. 4Outrageous
things have been said about God by the foolish among us, 5although
we had thought that no man or jinn would [dare to] tell a lie aboutHim. 6Men have sought refuge with the jinn in the past, but they
only misguided them further. 7They thought, as you did, that God
would never raise anyone from the dead. 8We tried to reach heaven,
but discovered it to be full of stern guards and shooting stars– – 9we
used to sit in places there, listening,
b but anyone trying to listen now
willﬁnd a shooting star lying in wait for him– – 10[so now] we do not
know whether those who live on earth are due for misfortune, orwhether their Lord intends to guide them. 11Some of us are right-
eous and others less so: we follow di ﬀerent paths. 12We know we can
never frustrate God on earth; we can never escape Him. 13When we
heard the guidance we came to believe: whoever believes in his Lordneed fear no loss nor injustice. 14Some of us submit to Him and
others go the wrong way: those who submit to God have found wiseguidance, 15but those who go wrong will be fuel for Hell ﬁre.” ’
16If they
c had taken to the right way, We would have given them
aUnseen beings.
bThey were listening for hints of what might come next, but in verse 10 they say they
are no longer able to know the future (cf. verse 26 below).
cThe Meccan Arabs.abundant water to drink– –17a test for thema– –but anyone who turns
away from his Lord’s Revelation will be sent by Him to spirallingtorment. 18Places of worship are for God alone– – so do not pray to
anyone other than God– –19yet when God’s Servant
b stood up to
pray to Him, they pressed in on him. 20Say, ‘I pray to my Lord alone;
I set up no partner with Him.’ 21Say, ‘I have no control over any
harm or good that may befall you.’ 22Say, ‘No one can protect me
from God: I have no refuge except in Him. 23I only deliver [what I
receive] from God– – only His messages.’
Whoever disobeys God and His Messenger will have Hell’s Fire
as his permanent home: 24when they are confronted by what they
have been warned about, they will realize who has the weaker pro-
tector and the smaller number. 25Say, ‘I do not know whether what
you have been warned about is near, or whether a distant time hasbeen appointed for it by my Lord.’ 26He is the One who knows what
is hidden. 27He does not disclose it except to a messenger of His
choosing. He sends watchers to go in front and behind 28to ensure
that each of His messengers delivers his Lord’s message: He knows
all about them, and He takes account of everything.
aIn the Qur ᾿an, plenty is as great a test as privation (see 21:35), if not greater (see
10:21–2).
bMuhammad.The Qur ᾿an 72:17 39473. ENFOLDED
A sura that is part very early Meccan, part Medinan (verse 20). This verse
describes how God relaxed the early regime of devotion ﬁrst imposed on the
Prophet (in verses 1–9) to prepare him for the weighty message. The Prophet is
urged to be patient (verses 10–11), told of the punishment that awaits the
Meccan disbelievers in Hell (verses 12–14), and reminded of the punishment
that befell Pharaoh in this life (verses 15–16).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1You [Prophet], enfolded in your cloak! 2Stay up throughout the
night, all but a small part of it, 3half, or a little less, 4or a little more;
recite the Qur ᾿an slowly and distinctly: 5We shall send a momentous
message down to you. 6Night prayera makes a deeper impression and
sharpens words– – 7you are kept busy for long periods of the day– –
8so celebrate the name of your Lord and devote yourself wholeheart-
edly to Him. 9He is Lord of the east and west, there is no god but
Him, so take Him as your Protector, 10patiently endure what they
say, ignore them politely, 11and leave to Me those who deny the truth
and live in luxury. Bear with them for a little while; 12We have
fetters, a blazing ﬁre, 13food that chokes, and agonizing torment in
store for them 14on the Day when the earth and the mountains will
shake. The mountains will become a heap of loose sand.
15We have sent a messenger to you [people] to be your witness, just
as We sent a messenger to Pharaoh, 16but Pharaoh disobeyed the
messenger and so We in ﬂicted a heavy punishment on him. 17So if
you disbelieve, how can you guard yourselves against a Day that willturn children’s hair grey, 18a Day when the sky will be torn apart?
God’s promise will certainly be ful ﬁlled. 19This is a reminder. Let
whoever wishes take the way to his Lord.
20[Prophet], your Lord is well aware that you sometimes spend
nearly two-thirds of the night at prayer– –sometimes half, sometimesa third– –as do some of your followers. God determines the divisionof night and day. He knows that you will not be able to keep a
aOr ‘the hours of night’/‘getting up at night’.measure of it and He has relented towards all of you, so recite as
much of the Qur ᾿an as is easy for you. He knows that some of you
will be sick, some of you travelling through the land seeking God’sbounty, some of you ﬁghting in God’s way: recite as much as is easy
for you, keep up the prayer, pay the prescribed alms, and make Goda good loan. Whatever good you store up for yourselves will beimproved and increased for you. Ask God for His forgiveness, He ismost forgiving, most merciful.The Qur ᾿an 73:20 39674. WRAPPED IN HIS CLOAK
After his ﬁrst encounter with the Angel of Revelation in the Cave of Hira, the
Prophet went home trembling and asked his wife to cover him with his cloak.Theﬁrst verses of this Meccan sura were then revealed (verses 1–7). The sura
goes on, in a section from a later period, to remind the obstinate disbelieversof their fate on the Day of Judgement (verses 8–10) and a speci ﬁc opponent of
the Prophet is singled out (verses 11–31). The end of the sura (verses 39–53)
exposes the foolishness of the disbelievers’ attitude to the Revelation and theDay of Resurrection.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1You, wrapped in your cloak, 2arise and give warning! 3Proclaim the
greatness of your Lord; 4cleanse yourself;a5keep away from all
ﬁlth;b6do not be overwhelmed and weaken;c7be steadfast in your
Lord’s cause.
8When the Trumpet sounds, 9that will be a Day of anguish for the
disbelievers. 10They will have no ease. 11[Prophet], leave Me to deal
with the one I created helpless,d12then gave vast wealth, 13and sons
by his side, 14making everything easy for him– – 15yet he still hopes I
will give him more. 16No! He has been stubbornly hostile to Our
revelation: 17I will in ﬂict a spiralling torment on him. 18He planned
and plotted– – 19devilishly he plotted! 20ferociously he plotted!– –
21and looked 22and frowned and scowled 23and turned away and
behaved arrogantly 24and said, ‘This is just old sorcery, 25just the talk
of a mortal!’
26I will throw him into the scorching Fire. 27What will explain to
you what the scorching Fire is? 28It spares nothing and leaves
nothing; 29it scorches the ﬂesh of humans; 30there are nineteen in
charge of it– – 31none other than angels appointed by Us to guard
aLiterally ‘clean your garments’ (see Razi for this idiomatic usage of thiyab ).
bOr ‘from all idolatry’.
cAn alternative translation would be ‘do not give, hoping only to receive’. The
translation given above is based on Mujahid’s understanding of manna  as ‘to weaken’.
See Razi for this interpretation, which seems much more appropriate to the context.
dAl-Walid ibn al-Mughira, one of the Prophet’s obstinate opponents.Hellﬁre–– and We have made their numbera a test for the dis-
believers. So those who have been given the Scripture will be certainand those who believe will have their faith increased: neither thosewho have been given the Scripture nor the believers will have anydoubts, but the sick at heart and the disbelievers will say, ‘Whatcould God mean by this description?’ God leaves whoever He will tostray and guides whoever He will– – no one knows your Lord’s forces
except Him– – this [description] is a warning to mortals. 32Yes ––b y
the moon! 33By the departing night! 34By the shining dawn! 35It is
one of the mightiest things, 36a warning to all mortals, 37to those of
you who choose to go ahead and those who lag behind.
38Every soul is held in pledge for its deeds, 39but the Companions
of the Right will stay 40in Gardens and ask 41about the guilty.
42‘What drove you to the Scorching Fire?’ [they will ask] 43and they
will answer, ‘We did not pray; 44we did not feed the poor; 45we
indulged with others [in mocking the believers]; 46we denied the
Day of Judgement 47until the Certain End came upon us.’ 48No
intercessor’s plea will bene ﬁt them now.
49What is the matter with them? Why do they turn away from the
warning, 50like frightened asses 51ﬂeeing from a lion? 52Each one of
them demands that a scripture be sent down to him and unrolled
before his very eyes– –53No! Truly they have no fear of the life to
come– –54but truly this is a reminder. 55Let whoever wishes to take
heed do so: 56they will only take heed if God so wishes. He is the
Lord who should be heeded, the Lord of forgiveness.
aSome have taken this literally to allude to a special signi ﬁcance of the number 19,
but it is much more likely to be ῾idda in the meaning of ‘number, group’ ( al-Mu ῾jam
al-Wasit ).The Qur ᾿an 74:32 39875. THE RESURRECTION
A Meccan sura, dealing with the Day of Resurrection and man’s denial of that
Day. God’s power is convincingly described in several vignettes (verses 3–4,
26–30,34–40). The third paragraph instructs the Prophet on appropriate
reception of the revelation (verses 16–19), and thereby serves to emphasize
that the Qur ᾿an is indeed God’s word.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Bya the Day of Resurrection 2and by the self-reproaching soul!
3Does man think We shall not put his bones back together?
4In fact, We can reshape his very ﬁngertips. 5Yet man wants to
deny what is ahead of him: 6he says, ‘So, when will this Day of
Resurrection be?’
7When eyes are dazzled 8and the moon eclipsed, 9when the sun
and the moon are brought together, 10on that Day man will say,
‘Where can I escape?’ 11Truly, there is no refuge: 12they will all
return to your Lord on that Day. 13On that Day, man will be told
what he put ﬁrst and what he put last. 14Truly, man is a clear witness
against himself, 15despite all the excuses he may put forward.
16[Prophet], do not rush your tongue in an attempt to hasten
[your memorization of] the Revelation: 17We shall make sure of its
safe collection and recitation. 18When We have recited it, repeat the
recitation 19and We shall make it clear.
20Truly you [people] love this ﬂeeting world 21and neglect the life
to come. 22On that Day there will be radiant faces, 23looking towards
their Lord, 24and on that Day there will be the sad and despairing
faces 25of those who realize that a great calamity is about to befall
them.
26Truly, when the soul reaches the collarbone; 27when it is said,
‘Could any charm-healer save him now?’; 28when he knows it is the
ﬁnal parting; 29when his legs are brought together:b30on that day he
will be driven towards your Lord. 31He neither believed nor prayed,
aThis is preceded by a phrase which can be rendered either ‘I swear’ or ‘I do not
swear’ (i.e. there is no need for me to swear), depending on how la is read.
bThis is taken to refer to when a corpse is wrapped in the shroud.32but denied the truth and turned away, 33walking back to his people
with a conceited swagger.
34Closer and closer it comes to you. 35Closer and closer still.
36Does man think he will be left alone?a37Was he not just a drop of
spilt-out sperm, 38which became a clinging form, which God shaped
in due proportion, 39fashioning from it the two sexes, male and
female? 40Does He who can do this not have the power to bring the
dead back to life?
aAnd not taken to account.The Qur ᾿an 75:32 40076. MANa
A Medinan sura that speaks of how man is tested (verses 2–3) and what the
results will be for the evildoers (verse 4) and for the righteous (verses 5–22).
The Prophet is urged to persevere in his devotion and to bear with patience(verses 23–6).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Was there not a period of time when man was nothing to speak of ?b
2We created man from a drop of mingled ﬂuid to put him to the test;
We gave him hearing and sight; 3We guided him to the right path,
whether he was grateful or not.
4We have prepared chains, iron collars, and blazing Fire for the
disbelievers, but 5the righteous will have a drink mixed with kafur ,c
6a spring for God’s servants, which ﬂows abundantly at their wish.
7They ful ﬁl their vows; they fear a day of widespread woes; 8they
give food to the poor, the orphan, and the captive, though they loveit themselves, 9saying, ‘We feed you for the sake of God alone: We
seek neither recompense nor thanks from you. 10We fear the Day of
our Lord– –a woefully grim Day.’ 11So God will save them from the
woes of that Day, give them radiance and gladness, 12and reward
them, for their steadfastness, with a Garden and silken robes.13They will sit on couches, feeling neither scorching heat nor biting
cold, 14with shady [branches] spread above them and clusters of
fruit hanging close at hand. 15They will be served with silver plates
16and gleaming silver goblets according to their fancy, 17and they
will be given a drink infused with ginger 18from a spring called
Salsabil. 19Everlasting youths will attend them– –if you could see
them, you would think they were scattered pearls– – 20and if you
were to look around, you would see bliss and great wealth: 21they
will wear garments of green silk and brocade; they will be adornedwith silver bracelets; their Lord will give them a pure drink.
aSee footnote g, Sura 89.
bLiterally ‘Has there not come over man a period of time when he was not men-
tioned?’ This refers to the time before a person is born, the point being that he wasnothing, then God created him, just as He will bring him to life again for Judgement.
cA fragrant herb.22[It will be said], ‘This is your reward. Your endeavours are
appreciated.’
23We Ourself have sent down this Qur ᾿an to you [Prophet] in
gradual revelation. 24Await your Lord’s Judgement with patience; do
not yield to any of these sinners or disbelievers; 25remember the
name of your Lord at dawn and in the evening; 26bow down before
Him, and glorify Him at length by night.
27These people love the ﬂeeting life. They put aside [all thoughts
of] a Heavy Day. 28Yet We created them; We strengthened their
constitution; if We please, We can replace such people completely.
29This is a reminder. Let whoever wishes, take the way to his Lord.
30But you will only wish to do so if God wills– – God is all knowing,
all wise– –31He admits whoever He will into His Mercy and has
prepared a painful torment for the disbelievers.The Qur ᾿an 76:22 40277. [WINDS] SENT FORTHa
A Meccan sura that describes the Day of Decision: its inevitability, argu-
ments for its coming, and the events that will presage the Judgement, as well asthe fates of believers and disbelievers.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1By the [winds] sent forth in swift succession, 2violently storming,
3scattering far and wide, 4separating forcefully, 5delivering a
reminder, 6as a proof or a warning: 7what you are promised will
come to pass. 8When the stars are dimmed 9and the sky is torn apart,
10when the mountains are turned to dust 11and the messengers given
their appointed timeb––12for what Day has all this been set?
13The Day of Decision. 14What will explain to you what the Day of
Decision is? 15Woe, on that Day, to those who denied the truth!
16Did We not destroy the ﬁrst [of them]? 17We shall make the last
follow them: 18this is how We deal with the guilty. 19Woe, on that
Day, to those who denied the truth!
20Did We not make you from an underrated ﬂuid 21which We
housed in a safe lodging 22for a determined period? 23We determine
[it]: how excellently We determine! 24Woe, on that Day, to those who
denied the truth! 25Did We not make the earth a home 26for the
living and the dead? 27Did We not place ﬁrm, lofty mountains on it
and provide you with sweet water? 28Woe, on that Day, to those who
denied the truth!
29They will be told, ‘Go to that which you used to deny! 30Go to a
shadow of smoke!’ It rises in three columns; 31no shade does it give,
nor relief from the ﬂame; 32it shoots out sparks as large as tree-
trunksc33and as bright as copper.d34Woe, on that Day, to those who
denied the truth! 35On that Day they will be speechless, 36and they
aSee30:48–51 and many other instances.
bTo give testimony for their communities (Razi).
cAn alternative meaning of qasr is ‘palaces, castles’, but this meaning of ‘tree-trunks’
seems to ﬁt better (Razi).
dCommonly translated as ‘camels’, but ‘copper’ (reported by Razi) is a more
convincing alternative.will be given no chance to o ﬀer any excuses. 37Woe, on that Day, to
those who denied the truth! 38[They will be told], ‘This is the Day of
Decision: We have gathered you and earlier generations. 39If you
have any plots against Me, try them now.’ 40Woe, on that Day, to
those who denied the truth! 41But those who took heed of God will
enjoy cool shade, springs, 42and any fruit they desire; 43[they will be
told], ‘Eat and drink to your hearts’ content as a reward for your
deeds: 44this is how We reward those who do good.’ 45Woe, on that
Day, to those who denied the truth!
46[You may] eat and enjoy yourselves for a short while, evildoers
that you are. 47Woe, on that Day, to those who denied the truth!
48When they are told, ‘Bow down in prayer,’ they do not do so. 49Woe,
on that Day, to those who denied the truth! 50In what revelation,
after this, will they believe?The Qur ᾿an 77:37 40478. THE ANNOUNCEMENTa
A Meccan sura. The disbelievers often asked incredulously about the
Resurrection. This sura gives evidence of God’s power, then explains what willhappen on the Day of Resurrection, and the respective fates of believers anddisbelievers.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1What are they asking about? 2The momentous announcement
3about which they di ﬀer. 4They will ﬁnd out. 5In the end they will
ﬁnd out. 6Did We not make the earth smooth, 7and make the
mountains to keep it stable?b8Did We not create you in pairs, 9give
you sleep for rest, 10the night as a cover, 11and the day for your
livelihood? 12Did We not build seven strong [heavens] above you,
13and make a blazing lamp? 14Did We not send water pouring down
from the clouds 15to bring forth with it grain, plants, 16and luxuri-
ant gardens? 17A time has been appointed for the Day of Decision:
18a Day when the Trumpet will sound and you will come forward
in crowds, 19when the sky will open up like wide portals, 20when
the mountains will vanish like a mirage. 21Hell lies in wait, 22a
home for oppressors 23to stay in for a long, long time, 24where they
will taste no coolness nor drink 25except one that is scalding and
darkc––26aﬁtting requital, 27for they did not fear a reckoning,
28and they rejected Our messages as lies. 29We have recorded every-
thing in a Record. 30‘Taste this: all you will get from Us is more
torment.’
31For those who were aware of God there is supreme ful ﬁlment:
32private gardens, vineyards, 33nubile, well-matched companions,
34and an over ﬂowing cup. 35There they will hear no vain or
lying talk: 36a reward from your Lord, a ﬁtting gift 37from the
Lord of the heavens and earth and everything between, the Lord ofMercy.
They will have no authority from Him to speak. 38On the Day
aOf the Resurrection and Judgement.
bLiterally ‘and the mountains [as its] pegs’.
cCf. 38:57.when the Spirita and the angels stand in rows, they will not speak
except for those to whom the Lord of Mercy gives permission, whowill say only what is right. 39That is the Day of Truth. So whoever
wishes to do so should take the path that leads to his Lord. 40We have
warned you of imminent torment, on the Day when every personwill see what their own hands have sent ahead for them, when thedisbeliever will say, ‘If only I were dust!’
b
aThe Angel Gabriel
bIn this world, they have often said, ‘What, when we are dust, shall we be raised
again?’The Qur ᾿an 78:39 40679. THE FORCEFUL CHARGERS
A Meccan sura, the main theme of which is the possibility and inevitability of
the Resurrection, its results, and its timing. The story of Moses and Pharaohacts as encouragement to the Prophet and a warning to the disbelievers.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1By the forceful chargersa2raring to go, 3sweeping ahead at full
stretch, 4overtaking swiftly 5to bring the matter to an end, 6on the
Day when the blast reverberates 7and the second blast follows,
8hearts will tremble 9and eyes will be downcast. 10Theyb say, ‘What?
shall we be brought back to life, 11after we have turned into decayed
bones?’ and they say, 12‘Such a return is impossible!’c13But all it will
take is a single blast, 14and they will be back above ground.
15Have you [Prophet] heard the story of Moses? 16His Lord called
out to him in the sacred valley of Tuwa: 17‘Go to Pharaoh, for he has
exceeded all bounds, 18and ask him, “Do you want to purify yourself
[of sin]? 19Do you want me to guide you to your Lord, so that you may
hold Him in awe?” ’ 20Moses showed him the great sign, 21but he
denied it and refused [the faith]. 22He turned away and hastily 23gath-
ered his people, proclaiming, 24‘I am your supreme lord,’ 25so God
condemned him to punishment in the life to come as well as in this life:
26there truly is a lesson in this for anyone who stands in awe of God.
27Which is harder to create: you people or the sky that He built,
28raising it high and perfecting it, 29giving darkness to its night and
bringing out its morning brightness, 30and the earth, too, He spread
out, 31bringing waters and pastures out of it, 32and setting ﬁrm
mountains [in it] 33for you and your animals to enjoy? 34When the
aThere are various interpretations of nazi ῾at. One is that they are angels coming to
take the souls at death, which is a ﬁtting oath, as this is a fearful event that cannot be
avoided, just as the hour of doom cannot be avoided. Another is that they are horsesgoing out on a military expedition, making the hearts of the enemy tremble. In myopinion this is the most likely (see Sura 100). The suddenness and feeling of alarm in
this scene is a symbolic anticipation of the suddenness and shock that will accompanythe end of the world.
bThe disbelievers of Mecca.
cOr (mockingly) ‘That would be a losing return!’.great overwhelming event arrives 35on the Day that man remembers
what he has done 36and Hell is there for all to see, 37for anyone who
has transgressed 38and preferred the present life 39Hell will be
home; 40for anyone who feared the meeting with his Lord and
restrained himself from base desires, 41Paradise will be home.
42They ask you [Prophet] about the Hour, 43saying, ‘When will it
arrive?’, but how can you tell [them that]? 44Its time is known only to
your Lord; 45you are only sent to warn those who fear it. 46On the
Day they see it, it will seem they lingered [in this life] an evening [at
most,] or its morning.a
aCf. 46:35.The Qur ᾿an 79:35 40880. HE FROWNED
A Meccan sura. While the Prophet was speaking to some disbelieving notables,
hoping to convert them, a blind Muslim man came up to learn from him, but inhis eagerness to attract the disbelievers to Islam, the Prophet frowned athim. The Prophet is then reproached and told not to concern himself withthe disbelievers. In the second paragraph there is a condemnation of man’singratitude: man becomes self-satis ﬁed and forgets his origin and his ﬁnal
return to God.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1He frowned and turned away 2when the blind man came to him– –
3for all you know,a he might have grown in spirit, 4or taken note of
something useful to him. 5For the self-satis ﬁed one 6you go out of
your way– – 7though you are not to be blamed for his lack of spiritual
growth– – 8but from the one who has come to you full of eagerness
9and awe 10you allow yourself to be distracted. 11No indeed! This
[Qur ᾿an] is a lesson 12from which those who wish to be taught should
learn, 13[written] on honoured, 14exalted, pure pages, 15by the hands
of16noble and virtuous scribes.
17Woe to man! How ungrateful he is! 18From what thing does God
create him? 19He creates him from a droplet, He proportions him,
20He makes the way easy for him, 21then He causes him to die and be
buried. 22When He wills, He will raise him up again. 23Yet manb
does not ful ﬁl God’s commands. 24Let man consider the food he
eats! 25Wec pour down abundant water 26and cause the soil to split
open. 27We make grain grow, 28and vines, fresh vegetation, 29olive
trees, date palms, 30luscious gardens, 31fruits, and fodder: 32all for
you and your livestock to enjoy.
33When the Deafening Blast comes– – 34the Day man will ﬂee from
his own brother, 35his mother, his father, 36his wife, his children:
aThe shift from talking about the Prophet to addressing him directly reinforces the
reproach.
bSome commentators take this to refer only to disbelievers.
cThis is a shift to the plural of divine majesty to emphasize the magnitude of the
action; see iltifat  in Introduction, p. xx.37each of them will be absorbed in concerns of their own on that
Day– –38on that Day some faces will be beaming, 39laughing, and
rejoicing, 40but some faces will be dust-stained 41and covered in
darkness: 42those are the disbelievers, the licentious.The Qur ᾿an 80:37 41081. SHROUDED IN DARKNESS
A Meccan sura stressing the fact that people will be confronted by their deeds on
Judgement Day, asserting the truth of the Qur ᾿an, and calling people to the
right path. It opens with a powerful description of events on that Day, and thetitle of the sura is taken from this description.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1When the sun is shrouded in darkness, 2when the stars are dimmed,
3when the mountains are set in motion, 4when pregnant camels are
abandoned, 5when wild beasts are herded together, 6when the seas
boil over, 7when souls are sorted into classes, 8when the baby girl
buried alive is asked 9for what sin she was killed,a10when the records
of deeds are spread open, 11when the sky is stripped away, 12when
Hell is made to blaze 13and Paradise brought near: 14then every soul
will know what it has brought about.
15I swear by the planets 16that recede, move, and hide, 17by the
night that descends, 18by the dawn that softly breathes: 19this is the
speech of a noble messenger,b20who possesses great strength and is
held in honour by the Lord of the Throne– – 21he is obeyed there and
worthy of trust. 22Your companionc is not mad: 23he did see himd on
the clear horizon. 24He does not withhold what is revealed to him
from beyond. 25This is not the word of an outcast devil.
26So where are you [people] going? 27This is a message for all
people; 28for those who wish to take the straight path. 29But you will
only wish to do so by the will of God, the Lord of all people.
aCf. 16:58–9. The pagan Arab habit of female infanticide.
bGabriel.
cAddressed to the Meccans. The companion is the Prophet.
dGabriel.82. TORN APART
A Meccan sura dealing with man’s ingratitude and his failure to concede that
the Day of Judgement will come. Again, the sura opens with a powerfuldescription of events on the Day of Judgement and the title is taken from thisdescription.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1When the sky is torn apart, 2when the stars are scattered, 3when the
seas burst forth, 4when graves turn inside out: 5each soul will know
what it has done and what it has left undone. 6Mankind, what has
lured you away from God, 7your generous Lord, who created you,
shaped you, proportioned you, 8in whatever form He chose? 9Yet
you still take the Judgement to be a lie! 10Over you stand 11watchers,
noble recorders 12who know what you do: 13the good will live in bliss,
14and the wicked will burn in the Fire. 15They will enter it on the
Day of Judgement 16and they will ﬁnd no escape. 17What will explain
to you what the Day of Judgement is? 18Yes! What will explain to you
what the Day of Judgement is? 19The Day when no soul will be able
to do anything for another; on that Day, command will belong toGod.
a
aOr ‘everything is up to God’.(412)83. THOSE WHO GIVE SHORT MEASURE
A Meccan sura. The practice of cheating appears to have been prevalent
in Mecca, and is strongly condemned here and elsewhere in the Qur ᾿an (e.g.
11:84–8;7:85). In the sura the fate of the cheats and disbelievers is
contrasted with the delight in store for the good.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Woe to those who give short measure, 2who demand of other people
full measure for themselves, 3but give less than they should when it
is they who weigh or measure for others! 4Do these people not
realize that they will be raised up 5on a mighty Day, 6a Day when
everyone will stand before the Lord of the Worlds? 7No indeed! The
list of the wicked is in Sijjina––8what will explain to you what Sijjin
is?– – 9a clearly numbered list. 10Woe on that day to the deniers,
11those who deny the Day of Judgement! 12Only the evil aggressor
denies it: 13when Our revelations are recited to him, he says,
‘Ancient fables!’ 14No indeed! Their hearts are encrusted with what
they have done. 15No indeed! On that Day they will be screened o ﬀ
from their Lord, 16they will burn in Hell, 17and they will be told,
‘This is what you called a lie.’
18No indeed! The list of the truly good is in ῾Illiyyinb––19what
will explain to you what ῾Illiyyin is?– – 20a clearly written list, 21wit-
nessed by those brought near.c22The truly good will live in bliss,
23seated on couches, gazing around. 24You will recognize on their
faces the radiance of bliss. 25They will be served a sealed nectar, 26its
seal [perfumed with] a fragrant herbd– –let those who strive, strive
for this– – 27mixed with the water of Tasnim,e28a spring from which
those brought near will drink. 29The wicked used to laugh at the
believers– – 30they would wink at one another when the believers
aThe root of this word, s–j–n , is the same as the one for sijn meaning ‘prison’. The
form is intensive.
bThe root of this word, ῾–l–w , relates to height. The form is intensive.
cThe elect. See also verse 28.
dOne meaning of misk (also ‘musk’).
eThe root of this word, s–n–m , suggests height and opulence.(413)passed by them, 31joke about them when they got back to their own
people, 32and say, when they saw them, ‘These people are misguided,’
33though they were not sent to be their keepers– –34so todaya the
believers are laughing at the disbelievers 35as they sit on couches,
gazing around. 36Have the disbelievers [not] been repaid for their
deeds?
aThis is in the present tense, as if described on that Day.83:31 414 The Qur ᾿an84. RIPPED APART
A Meccan sura dealing with the inevitability of man’s meeting with his Lord
on the Day of Judgement. The obedience of the sky and earth is contrasted withthe disobedience of the disbelievers. The reaction of the believers and of thedisbelievers on the Day of Judgement is described. The title is taken fromthe description of events on that Day in the opening verse.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1When the sky is ripped apart, 2obeying its Lord as it rightly must,
3when the earth is levelled out, 4casts out its contents, and becomes
empty, 5obeying its Lord as it rightly must, 6you humans, toiling
laboriously towards your Lord, will meet Him: 7whoever is given his
record in his right hand 8will have an easy reckoning 9and return to
his people well pleased, 10but whoever is given his record from
behind his back 11will cry out for destruction– – 12he will burn in the
blazing Fire. 13He used to live among his people well pleased. 14He
thought he would never return [to his Lord]– – 15indeed he will! His
Lord was watching him. 16I swear by the glow of sunset, 17by the
night and what it covers, 18by the full moon, 19you will progress from
stage to stage.a
20So why do they not believe? 21Why, when the Qur ᾿an is read
to them, do they not prostrate themselves [to God]? 22No! The
disbelievers reject the Qur ᾿an– – 23God knows best what they keep
hidden inside– – 24so give them news of a painful torment. 25But
those who believe and do good deeds will have a never-endingreward.
aAs the sun sets, followed by darkness, which is then illuminated by the moon, you
will move by stages from death to resurrection.(415)85. THE TOWERING CONSTELLATIONS
This Meccan sura strengthened the heart of the Prophet and his followers by
referring to the fate of those who tortured earlier believers. The title expressesGod’s power over the whole universe, from the stars in the sky to the evildoersreferred to in this sura. Indeed, His all-encompassing power is a recurringtheme throughout the sura.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1By the sky with its towering constellations, 2by the promised Day,
3by the Witnessa and that which is witnessed, 4damned were the
makers of the trench,b5the makers of the fuel-stoked ﬁre! 6They
sat down 7to watch what they were doing to the believers. 8Their
only grievance against them was their faith in God, the Mighty, thePraiseworthy, 9to whom all control over the heavens and earth
belongs: God is witness over all things.
10For those who persecute believing men and women, and do not
repent afterwards, there will be the torment of Hell and burning.11But for those who believe and do good deeds there will be Gardens
graced with ﬂowing streams: that is the great triumph. 12[Prophet],
your Lord’s punishment is truly stern– – 13it is He who brings people
to life, and will restore them to life again– – 14and He is the Most
Forgiving, the Most Loving. 15The Glorious Lord of the Throne,
16He does whatever He will. 17Have you [not] heard the stories of the
forces 18of Pharaoh and Thamud? 19Yet still the disbelievers persist
in denial. 20God surrounds them all.
21This is truly a glorious Qur ᾿an 22[written] on a preserved Tablet.
c
aGod.
bVarious suggestions are made as to who these trench-makers were, among others,
that they were those commanded to make a trench by a Jewish ruler of sixth-centuryYemen in order to torture Christians, also that the passage could refer to Nimrod’streatment of Abraham (Razi).
cGod keeps this with Him.(416)86. THE NIGHT-COMER
A Meccan sura that focuses on a series of examples of things coming out: the
piercing night-star, spurting semen, the baby that bursts out of the womb,and plants that sprout out of the ground. All of these are used to illustrateresurrection from the grave.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1By the sky and the night-comer– – 2What will explain to you what
the night-comer is? 3The piercing star– – 4there is a watcher over
every soul.
5Man should re ﬂect on what he was created from. 6He is created
from spurting ﬂuid, 7then hea emerges from between the backbone
and breastbone:b8God is certainly able to bring him back to life. 9On
the Day when secrets are laid bare 10he will have no power and no
one to help him.
11By the sky and its recurring rain, 12by the earth that cracks
open!c13This is truly a decisive statement; 14it is not something to be
taken lightly. 15They plot and scheme, 16but so do I: 17[Prophet], let
the disbelievers be, let them be for a while.
aThe pronoun here is taken to refer to the person rather than the ﬂuid.
bOf the mother, where she carries the baby. He emerges from the womb as he will
emerge from the grave.
cFor plants to come out, and humans on the Day of Resurrection.(417)87. THE MOST HIGH
A Meccan sura reassuring the Prophet that God will help him and urging him
to continue with his mission. The temporary nature of this world is highlightedthrough mention of the short life of green pasture (cf. 10:24;18:45).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1[Prophet], glorify the name of your Lord the Most High, 2who
created [all things] in due proportion; 3who determined their des-
tinies and guided them; 4who brought out the green pasture 5then
made it dark debris. 6[Prophet], We shall teach you [the Qur ᾿an] and
you will not forget– – 7unless God wishes; He knows both what is
open and what is hidden– – 8We shall show you the easy way.a9So
remind, if reminding will help.b10Those who stand in awe of God
will heed the reminder, 11but it will be ignored by the most wicked,
12who will enter the Great Fire, 13where they will neither die nor
live.c14Prosperous are those who purify themselves, 15remember the
name of their Lord, and pray. 16Yet you [people] prefer the life of
this world, 17even though the Hereafter is better and more lasting.
18All this is in the earlier scriptures, 19the scriptures of Abraham and
Moses.
aOr ‘We shall make things easy for you’ Literally: ‘We shall ease you towards ease’.
bRazi cites many instances in the Qur ᾿an where this structure conveys the meaning
‘warn [everyone], whether [or not] warning will help’.
cThey will neither be granted the respite of death, nor be able to enjoy their
continued state of life (Razi).(418)88. THE OVERWHELMING EVENT
This Meccan sura serves to warn the disbelievers, encourage the Prophet and
the believers, and absolve him of responsibility for the disbelievers. The titlecomes from the description of events on the Day of Judgement in the ﬁrst verse,
and the downcast faces of the disbelievers on that Day are contrasted with theradiant faces of the believers.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Have you heard tella [Prophet] about the Overwhelming Event?
2On that Day, there will be downcast faces, 3toiling and weary, 4as
they enter the blazing Fire 5and are forced to drink from a boiling
spring, 6with no food for them except bitter dry thorns 7that neither
nourish nor satisfy hunger. 8On that Day there will also be faces
radiant with bliss, 9well pleased with their labour, 10in a lofty garden,
11where they will hear no idle talk, 12with a ﬂowing spring, 13raised
couches, 14goblets placed before them, 15cushions set in rows, 16and
carpets spread. 17Do the disbelievers not see how rain cloudsb are
formed, 18how the heavens are lifted, 19how the mountains are raised
high, 20how the earth is spread out?
21So [Prophet] warn them: your only task is to give warning, 22you
are not there to control them. 23As for those who turn away and
disbelieve, God will in ﬂict the greatest torment upon them. It is to
Us they will return, 24and then it is for Us to call them to account.
aAn Arabic convention to draw attention to what follows.
bThe word ibl can mean ‘camel’ as well as ‘rain cloud’. However, the latter is better in
this context amongst all the other geographical images presented. Rain is often used toillustrate the concept of resurrection.(419)89. DAYBREAK
A Meccan sura in which God emphasizes (by oath) that the tyrants of the
Prophet’s time will be like those He dealt with in the past. The sura comparesthe destiny of the ungrateful with that of the souls at peace.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1By the Daybreak, 2by the Ten Nights,a3by the even and the odd,b
4by the passing nightc––5is this oath strong enough for a rational
person?
6Have you [Prophet] considered how your Lord dealt with [the
people] of ῾Ad,d7of Iram, [the city] of lofty pillars, 8whose like has
never been made in any land, 9and the Thamud,e who hewed into
the rocks in the valley, 10and the mighty and powerfulf Pharaoh?
11All of them committed excesses in their lands, 12and spread cor-
ruption there: 13your Lord let a scourge of punishment loose on
them. 14Your Lord is always watchful.
15[The nature of] mang is that, when his Lord tries him through
honour and blessings, he says, ‘My Lord has honoured me,’ 16but
when He tries him through the restriction of his provision, he says,‘My Lord has humiliated me.’ 17No indeed! You [people] do not
honour orphans, 18you do not urge one another to feed the poor,
aThis refers to the ﬁrst ten nights of the month of Dhu ’l-Hijjah, sacred before and
after the Prophet’s time, which culminate in the Hajj pilgrimage.
bThis has been interpreted in many ways: as a reference to numbers (as translated
here); or e.g. as the multiple (God’s creation) and the One (God Himself).
cThe complement of this oath is left unmentioned, to be understood from what
follows. The commentators use this to complete the oath with ‘they will be punished’based on the context of what follows. The omission reinforces the oath, as one has tothink more carefully in order to grasp it, a device known in Arabic rhetoric as hadhf
al-jawab  (cf. 38:1;50:1).
dSee26:123 ﬀ .
eSee26:141 ﬀ .
fDhu’l-awtad , ‘of the stakes’, is explained as a Bedouin expression conveying
strength and power. Another interpretation is that Pharaoh used stakes as implements oftorture.
gInsan  ‘man’ occurs sixty- ﬁve times in the Qur ᾿an. It applies to both men and
women, as of course does the generic ‘man’ in English.(420)19you consume inheritancea greedily, 20and you love wealth with a
passion. 21No indeed! When the earth is pounded to dust, pounded
and pounded, 22when your Lord comes with the angels, rank upon
rank, 23when Hell is that Day brought near– – on that Day man will
take heed, but what good will that be to him then? 24He will say,
‘Would that I had provided for this life to come!’ 25On that Day, no
one will punish as He punishes, 26and no one will bind as He binds.
27‘[But] you, soul at peace:b28return to your Lord well pleased and
well pleasing; 29go in among My servants; 30and into My Garden.’
aThis could refer to the inheritance of orphans (see 4:2 and 4:10) or inheritance
generally.
bAt peace through remembering God in this life and the next (cf. 13:28), unlike the
disbeliever who only takes heed on the Day of Judgement, when it will not bene ﬁt him.
There is iltifat  here: the sinners are mentioned in the third person while the honoured
are addressed directly by their Lord.421 89:30 Daybreak90. THE CITY
Revealed in Mecca. The point of this sura is that man is created to work and
be judged. He should therefore seek to do good deeds rather than indulge inarrogance and wastefulness.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1I swear by this citya––2and you [Prophet] are an inhabitantb of this
city– – 3[I swear] by parent and o ﬀspring, 4that We have created man
for toil and trial. 5Does he think that no one will have power over
him? 6‘I have squandered great wealth,’ he says. 7Does he think no
one observes him? 8Did We not give him eyes, 9a tongue, lips, 10and
point out to him the two clear ways [of good and evil]? 11Yet he has
not attempted the steep path. 12What will explain to you what the
steep path is? 13It is to free a slave, 14to feed at a time of hunger 15an
orphaned relative 16or a poor person in distress, 17and to be one of
those who believe and urge one another to steadfastness and compas-sion. 18Those who do this will be on the right-hand side, 19but those
who disbelieve in Our revelations will be on the left-hand side, 20and
the Fire will close in on them.
aMecca.
bHillun bi  can mean ‘fair game’ for the disbelievers, even in this inviolable city,
‘resident’, ‘free to live’; some see that it means the Prophet is a temporary resident,others that it prophesies his return after emigration to Medina.(422)91. THE SUN
A Meccan sura, the central theme of which is purifying or corrupting the soul,
with the tribe of Thamud given as an example of corruption.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1By the sun in its morning brightness 2and by the moon as it follows
it, 3by the day as it displays the sun’s glory 4and by the night as it
conceals it, 5by the sky and how He built it 6and by the earth and
how He spread it, 7by the soul and how He formed it 8and inspired it
[to know] its own rebellion and piety! 9The one who puri ﬁes his soul
succeeds 10and the one who corrupts it fails. 11In their arrogant
cruelty, the people of Thamuda called [their messenger] a liar,
12when the most wicked man among them rose [against him].b13The
messenger of God said to them, ‘[Leave] God’s camel to drink,’14but they called him a liar and hamstrung her. Their Lord destroyed
them for their crime and levelled them. 15He did not hesitate
c to
punishd them.
aSee e.g. 7:73–9 (on the tribe of Thamud).
bCf. 54:29.
cLiterally ‘he does not fear’.
dOne of the lexical meanings of ῾uqba  is jaza ᾿, here ‘to punish’; or ‘does not fear the
consequences’.(423)92. THE NIGHT
A Meccan sura showing the consequences of the paths people choose and
emphasizing God’s guidance and warning.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1By the enshrouding night, 2by the radiant day, 3by His creationa of
male and female! 4The ways you take di ﬀer greatly. 5There is the one
who gives, who is mindful of God, 6who testi ﬁes to goodness– – 7We
shall smooth his way towards ease. 8There is the one who is miserly,
who is self-satis ﬁed, 9who denies goodness– – 10We shall smooth his
way towards hardship 11and his wealth will not help him as he falls.b
12Our part is to provide guidance– – 13this world and the next
belong to Us– – 14so I warn you about the raging Fire, 15in which
none but the most wicked one will burn, 16who denied [the truth],
and turned away. 17The most pious one will be spared this– – 18who
gives his wealth away as self-puri ﬁcation, 19not to return a favour to
anyone 20but for the sake of his Lord the Most Highc––21and he will
be well pleased.
aOr ‘by Him who created . . .’.
bOr ‘what use will his wealth be to him when he falls?’.
cLiterally ‘for the sake of the Face of his Lord’.(424)93. THE MORNING BRIGHTNESS
An early Meccan sura addressed to the Prophet, to reassure him, when he had
not received revelation for some time, that his Lord had not forsaken him.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1By the morning brightness 2and by the night when it grows still,
3your Lord has not forsaken you [Prophet], nor does He hate
you, 4and the future will be better for you than the past; 5your
Lord is sure to give you so much that you will be well satis ﬁed.
6Did He not ﬁnd you an orphan and shelter you? 7Did He not ﬁnd
you lost and guide you? 8Did He not ﬁnd you in need and make you
self-su ﬃcient?
9So do not be harsh with the orphan 10and do not chide the one
who asks for help; 11talk about the blessings of your Lord.(425)94. RELIEF
This Meccan sura, addressed to the Prophet, is a continuation of the
reassurance and encouragement given in Sura 93.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Did We not relieve your heart for you [Prophet], 2and remove the
burden 3that weighed so heavily on your back, 4and raise your
reputation high? 5So truly where there is hardship there is also ease;
6truly where there is hardship there is also ease. 7The moment you
are freed [of one task] work on, 8and turn to your Lord for
everything.(426)95. THE FIG
A Meccan sura questioning how man can deny the Judgement, and empha-
sizing the importance of faith and good deeds.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1By the ﬁg, by the olive, 2by Mount Sinai, 3by this safe town,a
4We create man in the ﬁnest state 5then reduce him to the lowest of
the low, 6except those who believe and do good deeds– – 7they will
have an unfailing reward. After this, what makes you [man] deny the
Judgement?b8Is God not the most decisive of judges?c
aMecca.
bOr ‘who could say that you [Prophet] are lying about the Judgement?’ (Razi)
cGod would not create you and leave you without Judgement (cf. 23:115–6).(427)96. THE CLINGING FORMa
A Meccan sura named after the term ῾alaq in verse 2. The ﬁrst ﬁve verses are
known to be the ﬁrst revelation of the Qur ᾿an when the Prophet was instructed
to read. The second part came later to show that man transgresses when hebecomes self-satis ﬁed (as exempli ﬁed by a speci ﬁc individual, Abu Jahl).
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Read! In the name of your Lord who created: 2He created manb
from a clinging form. 3Read! Your Lord is the Most Bountiful One
4who taught by [means of] the pen, 5who taught man what he did
not know.
6But man exceeds all bounds 7when he thinks he is self-su ﬃcient:
8[Prophet], all will return to your Lord. 9Have you seen the man
who forbids 10[Our] servant to pray? 11Have you seen whether he is
rightly guided, 12or encourages true piety? 13Have you seen whether
he denies the truth and turns away from it? 14Does he not realize that
God sees all? 15No! If he does not stop, We shall drag him by his
foreheadc––16his lying, sinful forehead. 17Let him summon his com-
rades; 18We shall summon the guards of Hell. 19No! Do not obey him
[Prophet]: bow downd in worship and draw close.
aA stage in the development of a foetus (cf. 22:5), i.e. embryo. ῾Alaq  can also mean
anything that clings: a clot of blood, a leech, even a lump of mud. All these meaningsinvolve the basic idea of clinging or sticking. Clinging indicates a state of total depend-ence in contrast with verse 7.
bSee note to 89:15.
cIn Hell. Many translators give ‘forelock’ instead of ‘forehead’ (cf. 54:48). His head
is sinful, not his forelock.
dSujud  is a position in the Muslim prayer with head, hands, knees, and toes on the
ground, but not the rest of the body as in ‘prostration’.(428)97. THE NIGHT OF GLORY
This Meccan sura celebrates the night when the ﬁrst revelation of the Qur ᾿an
was sent down.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1We sent it down on the Night of Glory. 2What will explain to you
what that Night of Glory is? 3The Night of Glory is better than a
thousand months; 4on that night the angels and the Spirita descend
again and again with their Lord’s permission on every task; 5[there
is] peace that night until the break of dawn.
aThe Angel Gabriel.(429)98. CLEAR EVIDENCE
A Medinan sura that takes its title from the clear evidence demanded by the
disbelievers before they will believe. It spells out the basic tenets of faith, andcontrasts the Fire of Hell with the lasting bliss that will be enjoyed by thefaithful.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Those who disbelieve among the People of the Book and the idol-
aters were not about to change their ways until they were sent clearevidence, 2a messenger from God, reading out pages [blessed with]
purity, 3containing true scriptures. 4[Yet] those who were given the
Scripture became divided only after they were sent [such] clear evi-
dence 5though all they are ordered to do is worship God alone,
sincerely devoting their religion to Him as people of true faith, keepup the prayer, and pay the prescribed alms, for that is the true
religion. 6Those who disbelieve among the People of the Book and
the idolaters will have the Fire of Hell, there to remain. They are theworst of creation.
7Those who believe and do good deeds are the best of creation.
8Their reward with their Lord is everlasting Gardens graced with
ﬂowing streams, where they will stay forever. God is well pleased
with them and they with Him. All this is for those who stand in aweof their Lord.(430)99. THE EARTHQUAKE
A Medinan sura, one of a series of suras that deal with scenes from the Day of
Judgement. Compare Suras 81,82,101, and others .
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1When the earth is shaken violently in its [last] quaking, 2when the
earth throws out its burdens,a3when man cries, ‘What is happening
to it?’; 4on that Day, it will tell all 5because your Lord will inspire it
[to do so]. 6On that Day, people will come forward in separate
groups to be shown their deeds: 7whoever has done an atom’s-weight
of good will see it, 8but whoever has done an atom’s-weight of evil
will see that.
aThis refers to the dead being thrown out of their graves.(431)100. THE CHARGING STEEDS
An early Meccan sura in which God swears by the warhorses He has subjected
to man’s usea that man is ungrateful and misguided.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1By the charging steeds that pant 2and strike sparks with their
hooves, 3who make dawn raids, 4raising a cloud of dust, 5and plunging
into the midst of the enemy, 6man is ungrateful to his Lord– – 7and
He is witness to thisb––8he is truly excessive in his love of wealth.
9Does he not know that when the contents of graves burst forth,
10when the secrets of hearts are uncovered, on that Day, 11their Lord
will be fully aware of them all?
aCf. 36:71–2;43:12–13.
bOr man will by his own actions be a witness against himself on the Day of
Judgement.(432)101. THE CRASHING BLOW
A Meccan sura which gives some scenes from the Resurrection and Judgement.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1The Crashing Blow! 2What is the Crashing Blow? 3What will
explain to you what the Crashing Blow is? 4On a Day when people
will be like scattered moths 5and the mountains like tufts of wool,
6the one whose good deeds are heavy on the scales 7will have a
pleasant life, 8but the one whose good deeds are light 9will have the
Bottomless Pit for his homea––10what will explain to you what that
is?– – 11a blazing ﬁre.
aLiterally ‘his mother is the bottomless pit’.(433)102. STRIVING FOR MORE
A Meccan sura which criticizes man’s preoccupation with worldly wealth and
stresses that he will be brought to account on the Day of Resurrection.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Striving for more distracts you 2until you go into your graves.a3No
indeed! You will come to know. 4No indeed! In the end you will come
to know. 5No indeed! If only you knew for certain. 6You will most
deﬁnitely see Hell ﬁre, 7you will see it with the eye of certainty. 8On
that Day, you will be asked about your pleasures.
aLiterally ‘until you visit the graves’. Their stay in the grave is like a short visit (cf.
46:35).(434)103. THE DECLINING DAYa
A Meccan sura showing the way to salvation. The image of a declining day
suggests the stage in the day, or in life, when only a short while is left for thosewishing to make up for lost time.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1By the declining day, 2man is [deep] in loss, 3except for those who
believe, do good deeds, urge one another to the truth, and urge one
another to steadfastness.
aOther interpretations of the title include ‘Time’ and ‘The Flight of Time’.(435)104. THE BACKBITER
A Meccan sura that condemns the greedy backbiter and gives a description of
Hell.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Woe to every fault- ﬁnding backbitera2who amasses riches, count-
ing them over, 3thinking they will make him live for ever. 4No
indeed! He will be thrust into the Crusher! 5What will explain to you
what the Crusher is? 6It is God’s Fire, made to blaze, 7which rises
over people’s hearts. 8It closes in on them 9in towering columns.b
aSaid to refer either to al-Akhnas ibn Shurayq or to al-Walid ibn al-Mughira (cf.
note to 74:11).
bCf. 77:30–3.(436)105. THE ELEPHANT
This sura is a reference to events that happened in 570ce,the year of the
Prophet’s birth, when the army of Abraha (a Christian ruler of Yemen),which included war elephants, marched to attack Mecca, destroy the Ka ῾ba,
and divert pilgrims to the new cathedral in San ῾a. The destruction of this
army is cited here to encourage the believers and warn the disbelievers.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Do you [Prophet] not see how your Lord dealt with the army of the
elephant? 2Did He not utterly confound their plans? 3He sent ranks
of birds against them, 4pelting them with pellets of hard-baked clay:
5He made them [like] cropped stubble.(437)106. QURAYSH
This Meccan sura connects grammatically with the previous one’s account of
how God defeated the threat to Mecca posed by Abraha, so making it safe forthe tribe of Quraysh to continue their trading journeys.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1[He did this] to make the Quraysh feel secure,a2secure in their
winter and summer journeys.b3So let them worship the Lord of this
House:c4who provides them with food to ward o ﬀ hunger, safety to
ward o ﬀ fear.
aOr ‘so that their covenants of security [from their neighbours should continue]’ or
‘so that they should remain accustomed to their trade journeys, and not stop them’.
bTheir two annual trade caravans– –to Yemen in winter and to Syria in summer– –on
which the prosperity of the Quraysh depended.
cThe Ka ῾ba.(438)107. COMMON KINDNESSES
A Meccan sura describing some characteristics of a person who denies the
Judgement.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1[Prophet], have you considered the person who denies the Judge-
ment? 2It is he who pushes aside the orphan 3and does not urge
others to feed the needy. 4So woe to those who pray 5but are heedless
of their prayer; 6those who are all show 7and forbid common
kindnesses.(439)108. ABUNDANCE
When the Prophet lost his last son, an opponent who hated him taunted him
with being ‘cut o ﬀ’ without posterity. This Meccan sura comes to reassure the
Prophet and as a retort to his enemy.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1We have truly given abundancea to you [Prophet]– – 2so pray to your
Lord and make your sacri ﬁce to Him alone– – 3it is the one who hates
you who has been cut o ﬀ.
aThe word kawthar , ‘abundance’, is also interpreted here as referring to a speci ﬁc
river in Paradise.(440)109. THE DISBELIEVERS
Some of the Meccan idolaters suggested to the Prophet as a compromise that he
should worship their gods for a year and they should worship his for a year. Thiswas the reply.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Say [Prophet], ‘Disbelievers: 2I do not worship what you worship,
3you do not worship what I worship, 4I will never worship what you
worship, 5you will never worship what I worship:a6you have your
religion and I have mine.’
aIf you keep to your present gods (see Zamakhshari, al-Kashshaf , vol. iv).(441)110. HELP
A Medinan sura said to be one of the last revelations the Prophet received
before his death.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1When God’s help comes and He opens upa your way [Prophet],
2when you see people embracing God’s faith in crowds, 3celebrate
the praise of your Lord and ask His forgiveness: He is always readyto accept repentance.
aThis sura is mainly understood by interpreters to refer to the surrender of Mecca to
the Prophet. Accordingly many translate the word fath as ‘victory’, although there was
noﬁghting. See also Sura 48,Surat al-Fath .Fath  in classical Arabic means ‘opening’ or
‘decision’. In a prayer, the Prophet says, ‘Lord, open the gates of your Mercy for me.’Sura 1 is called al-Fatiha , as it opens the Qur ᾿an. In 7:89,iftah  means ‘decide between us
and our enemy’.(442)111. PALM FIBRE
This sura refers to an uncle of the Prophet who opposed him ﬁercely, as did
his wife. He insulted the Prophet with ‘ Tabbak yadak ’ (‘may your hands be
ruined’). This Meccan sura is the retort.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1May the hands of Abu Lahab be ruined! May he be ruined too!
2Neither his wealth nor his gains will help him: 3he will burn in the
Flaming Fire– –a4and so will his wife, the ﬁrewood-carrier,b5with a
palm- ﬁbre rope around her neck.
aAbu Lahab means ‘Flame Man’ and this verse contains a pun on this name.
bShe used to tie bunches of thorns with ropes of twisted palm ﬁbre and throw them
into the Prophet’s path.(443)112. PURITY [OF FAITH]
This sura is unusual in having as its title a term not mentioned in the body of
the sura. Ikhlas conveys the meaning of sincerity in one’s religion and total
dedication to the One true God. Because of the importance of this theme inIslam, the Prophet said that this sura, despite its brevity, was equal to one-thirdof the Qur ᾿an.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Say, ‘He is God the One, 2God the eternal.a3He begot no one nor
was He begotten. 4No one is comparable to Him.’
aSamad : other commonly held interpretations include ‘self-su ﬃcient’ and ‘sought
by all’ (Razi).(444)113. DAYBREAK
A Meccan sura used as an invocation against evil.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Say [Prophet], ‘I seek refuge with the Lord of daybreak 2against the
harm in what He has created, 3the harm in the night when darkness
gathers, 4the harm in witches when they blow on knots,a5the harm
in the envier when he envies.’
aSaid to be a means of practising witchcraft and casting spells.(445)114. PEOPLE
Another Meccan sura commonly used as an invocation against evil.
In the name of God, the Lord of Mercy, the Giver of Mercy
1Say, ‘I seek refuge with the Lord of people, 2the Controllera
of people, 3the God of people, 4against the harm of the slinking
whisperer– – 5who whispers into the hearts of people– – 6whether
they be jinn or people.’
aOr ‘King’ or ‘Master’.