INTRODUCTION
om	ajñāna-timirāndhasya	jñānāñjana-śalākayā
cakṣur	unmīlitaṁ	yena	tasmai	śrī-gurave	namaḥ
śrī-caitanya-mano	'bhīṣṭaṁ	sthāpitaṁ	yena	bhū-tale
svayaṁ	rūpaḥ	kadā	mahyaṁ	dadāti	sva-padāntikam
I	was	born	in	the	darkest	ignorance,	and	my	spiritual	master	opened	my	eyes
with	the	torch	of	knowledge.	I	offer	my	respectful	obeisances	unto	him.
When	will	Śrīla	Rūpa	Gosvāmī	Prabhupāda,	who	has	established	within	this
material	world	the	mission	to	fulfill	the	desire	of	Lord	Caitanya,	give	me
shelter	under	his	lotus	feet?
vande	'haṁ	śrī-guroḥ	śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ	śrī-gurun	vaiṣṇavāṁś	ca
	
śrī-rūpaṁ	sāgrajātaṁ	saha-gaṇa-raghunāthānvitaṁ	taṁ	sa-jīvam
	
sādvaitaṁ	sāvadhūtaṁ	parijana-sahitaṁ	kṛṣṇa-caitanya-devaṁ
	
śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pādān	saha-gaṇa-lalitā-śrī-viśākhānvitāṁś	caI	offer	my	respectful	obeisances	unto	the	lotus	feet	of	my	spiritual	master	and
unto	the	feet	of	all	Vaiṣṇavas.	I	offer	my	respectful	obeisances	unto	the	lotus
feet	of	Śrīla	Rūpa	Gosvāmī	along	with	his	elder	brother	Sanātana	Gosvāmī,	as
well	as	Raghunātha	Dāsa	and	Raghunātha	Bhaṭṭa,	Gopāla	Bhaṭṭa,	and	Śrīla
Jīva	Gosvāmī.	I	offer	my	respectful	obeisances	to	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	Caitanya	and
Lord	Nityānanda	along	with	Advaita	Ācārya,	Gadādhara,	Śrīvāsa,	and	other
associates.	I	offer	my	respectful	obeisances	to	Śrīmatī	Rādhārāṇī	and	Śrī
Kṛṣṇa	along	with	Their	associates,	Śrī	Lalitā	and	Viśākhā.
he	kṛṣṇa	karunā-sindho	dīna-bandho	jagat-pate
gopeśa	gopikā-kānta	rādhā-kānta	namo	'stu	te
O	my	dear	Kṛṣṇa,	You	are	the	friend	of	the	distressed	and	the	source	of
creation.	You	are	the	master	of	the	
gopīs	
and	the	lover	of	Rādhārāṇī.	I	offer
my	respectful	obeisances	unto	You.
tapta-kāñcana-gaurāṅgi	rādhe	vṛndāvaneśvari
vṛṣabhānu-sute	devi	praṇamāmi	hari-priye
I	offer	my	respects	to	Rādhārāṇī	whose	bodily	complexion	is	like	molten	gold
and	who	is	the	Queen	of	Vṛndāvana.	You	are	the	daughter	of	King	Vṛṣabhānu,
and	You	are	very	dear	to	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.
vāñchā-kalpatarubhyaś	ca	kṛpā-sindhubhya	eva	ca
patitānāṁ	pāvanebhyo	vaiṣṇavebhyo	namo	namaḥ
I	offer	my	respectful	obeisances	unto	all	the	Vaiṣṇava	devotees	of	the	Lord
who	can	fulfill	the	desires	of	everyone,	just	like	desire	trees,	and	who	are	full
of	compassion	for	the	fallen	souls.
śrī	kṛṣṇa	caitanya	prabhu	nityānanda
śrī	advaita	gadādhara	śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda
I	offer	my	obeisances	to	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	Caitanya,	Prabhu	Nityānanda,	Śrī	Advaita,
Gadādhara,	Śrīvāsa	and	all	others	in	the	line	of	devotion.
hare	kṛṣṇa,	hare	kṛṣṇa,	kṛṣṇa	kṛṣṇa,	hare	hare
hare	rāma,	hare	rāma,	rāma	rāma,	hare	hare.Bhagavad-gītā
	is	also	known	as	
Gītopaniṣad.	
It	is	the	essence	of	Vedic
knowledge	and	one	of	the	most	important	
Upaniṣads	
in	Vedic	literature.	Of
course	there	are	many	commentaries	in	English	on	the	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
and
one	may	question	the	necessity	for	another	one.	This	present	edition	can	be
explained	in	the	following	way.	Recently	an	American	lady	asked	me	to
recommend	an	English	translation	of	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
Of	course	in	America
there	are	so	many	editions	of	
Bhagavad-gītā	
available	in	English,	but	as	far	as
I	have	seen,	not	only	in	America	but	also	in	India,	none	of	them	can	be	strictly
said	to	be	authoritative	because	in	almost	every	one	of	them	the	commentator
has	expressed	his	own	opinions	without	touching	the	spirit	of	
Bhagavad-gītā
as	it	is.
The	spirit	of	
Bhagavad-gītā
	is	mentioned	in	
Bhagavad-gītā
	itself.	It	is	just
like	this:	if	we	want	to	take	a	particular	medicine,	then	we	have	to	follow	the
directions	written	on	the	label.	We	cannot	take	the	medicine	according	to	our
own	whim	or	the	direction	of	a	friend.	It	must	be	taken	according	to	the
directions	on	the	label	or	the	directions	given	by	a	physician.	Similarly,
Bhagavad-gītā	
should	be	taken	or	accepted	as	it	is	directed	by	the	speaker
himself.	The	speaker	of	
Bhagavad-gītā
	is	Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.	He	is	mentioned	on
every	page	of	
Bhagavad-gītā	
as	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
Bhagavān.	Of	course	the	word	"
bhagavān
"sometimes	refers	to	any	powerful
person	or	any	powerful	demigod,	and	certainly	here	Bhagavān	designates
Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	as	a	great	personality,	but	at	the	same	time	we	should	know
that	Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	as	is	confirmed	by
all	great	
ācāryas	
(spiritual	masters)	like	Śaṅkarācārya,	Rāmānujācārya,
Madhvācārya,	Nimbārka	Svāmī,	Śrī	Caitanya	Mahāprabhu	and	many	other
authorities	of	Vedic	knowledge	in	India.	The	Lord	Himself	also	establishes
Himself	as	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
and	He
is	accepted	as	such	in	the	
Brahma-	saṁhitā	
and	all	the	
Purāṇas,	
especially	the
Śrīmad-	Bhāgavatam,	
known	as	the	
Bhāgavata	Purāṇa	
(
Kṛṣṇas	tu	bhagavān
svayam
).	Therefore	we	should	take	
Bhagavad-gītā	
as	it	is	directed	by	the
Personality	of	Godhead	Himself.
In	the	Fourth	Chapter	of	the	
Gītā	
the	Lord	says:
(1)		
imaṁ	vivasvate	yogaṁ	proktavān	aham	avyayam
vivasvān	manave	prāha	manur	ikṣvākave	'bravīt
(2)		
evaṁ	paramparā-prāptam	imaṁ	rājarṣayo	viduḥ
sa	kāleneha	mahatā	yogo	naṣṭaḥ	parantapa(3)		
sa	evāyaṁ	mayā	te	'dya	yogaḥ	proktaḥ	purātanaḥ
bhakto	'si	me	sakhā	ceti	rahasyaṁ	hy	etad	uttamam
Here	the	Lord	informs	Arjuna	that	this	system	of	
yoga,	
the	
Bhagavad-	gītā
,
was	first	spoken	to	the	sun-god,	and	the	sun-god	explained	it	to	Manu,	and
Manu	explained	it	to	Ikṣvāku,	and	in	that	way,	by	disciplic	succession,	one
speaker	after	another,	this	
yoga	
system	has	been	coming	down.	But	in	the
course	of	time	it	has	become	lost.	Consequently	the	Lord	has	to	speak	it	again,
this	time	to	Arjuna	on	the	Battlefield	of	Kurukṣetra.
He	tells	Arjuna	that	He	is	relating	this	supreme	secret	to	him	because	he	is
His	devotee	and	His	friend.	The	purport	of	this	is	that	
Bhagavad-gītā
	is	a
treatise	which	is	especially	meant	for	the	devotee	of	the	Lord.	There	are	three
classes	of	transcendentalists,	namely	the	
jñānī
,	the	
yogī
	and	the	
bhakta,	
or	the
impersonalist,	the	meditator	and	the	devotee.	Here	the	Lord	clearly	tells
Arjuna	that	He	is	making	him	the	first	receiver	of	a	new	
paramparā	
(disciplic
succession)	because	the	old	succession	was	broken.	It	was	the	Lord's	wish,
therefore,	to	establish	another	
paramparā	
in	the	same	line	of	thought	that	was
coming	down	from	the	sun-god	to	others,	and	it	was	His	wish	that	His
teaching	be	distributed	anew	by	Arjuna.	He	wanted	Arjuna	to	become	the
authority	in	understanding	the	
Bhagavad-	gītā.	So	
we	see	that	
Bhagavad-gītā
is	instructed	to	Arjuna	especially	because	Arjuna	was	a	devotee	of	the	Lord,	a
direct	student	of	Kṛṣṇa,	and	His	intimate	friend.	Therefore	
Bhagavad-gītā	
is
best	understood	by	a	person	who	has	qualities	similar	to	Arjuna's.	That	is	to
say	he	must	be	a	devotee	in	a	direct	relationship	with	the	Lord.	As	soon	as	one
becomes	a	devotee	of	the	Lord,	he	also	has	a	direct	relationship	with	the	Lord.
That	is	a	very	elaborate	subject	matter,	but	briefly	it	can	be	stated	that	a
devotee	is	in	a	relationship	with	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	in	one	of
five	different	ways:
1.	One	may	be	a	devotee	in	a	passive	state;
2.	One	may	be	a	devotee	in	an	active	state;
3.	One	may	be	a	devotee	as	a	friend;
4.	One	may	be	a	devotee	as	a	parent;
5.	One	may	be	a	devotee	as	a	conjugal	lover.
Arjuna	was	in	a	relationship	with	the	Lord	as	friend.	Of	course	there	is	a
gulf	of	difference	between	this	friendship	and	the	friendship	found	in	the
material	world.	This	is	transcendental	friendship	which	cannot	be	had	byeveryone.	Of	course	everyone	has	a	particular	relationship	with	the	Lord,	and
that	relationship	is	evoked	by	the	perfection	of	devotional	service.	But	in	the
present	status	of	our	life,	we	have	not	only	forgotten	the	Supreme	Lord,	but
we	have	forgotten	our	eternal	relationship	with	the	Lord.	Every	living	being,
out	of	many,	many	billions	and	
trillions	of	living	beings,	has	a	particular
relationship	with	the	Lord	eternally.	That	is	called	
svarūpa.	
By	the	process	of
devotional	service,	one	can	revive	that	
svarūpa,	
and	that	stage	is	called
svarūpa-siddhi
–perfection	of	one's	constitutional	position.	So	Arjuna	was	a
devotee,	and	he	was	in	touch	with	the	Supreme	Lord	in	friendship.
How	Arjuna	accepted	this	
Bhagavad-gītā	
should	be	noted.	His	manner	of
acceptance	is	given	in	the	Tenth	Chapter.
(12)		
arjuna	uvāca
paraṁ	brahma	paraṁ	dhāma	pavitraṁ	paramaṁ	bhavān
puruṣaṁ	śāśvataṁ	divyam	ādi-devam	ajaṁ	vibhum
(13)		
āhus	tvām	ṛṣayaḥ	sarve	devarṣir	nāradas	tathā
asito	devalo	vyāsaḥ	svayaṁ	caiva	bravīṣi	me
(14)		
sarvam	etad	ṛtaṁ	manye	yan	māṁ	vadasi	keśava
na	hi	te	bhagavan	vyaktiṁ	vidur	devā	na	dānavāḥ
"Arjuna	said:	You	are	the	Supreme	Brahman,	the	ultimate,	the	supreme	abode
and	purifier,	the	Absolute	Truth	and	the	eternal	Divine	Person.	You	are	the
primal	God,	transcendental	and	original,	and	You	are	the	unborn	and	all-
pervading	beauty.	All	the	great	sages	like	Nārada,	Asita,	Devala,	and	Vyāsa
proclaim	this	of	You,	and	now	You	Yourself	are	declaring	it	to	me.	O	Kṛṣṇa,	I
totally	accept	as	truth	all	that	You	have	told	me.	Neither	the	gods	nor	demons,
O	Lord,	know	Thy	personality."	(Bg.	10.	12-14).
After	hearing	
Bhagavad-gītā	
from	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
Arjuna	accepted	Kṛṣṇa	as	
Paraṁ	Brahma,	
the	Supreme	Brahman.	Every
living	being	is	Brahman,	but	the	supreme	living	being,	or	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	is	the	Supreme	Brahman.	
Paraṁ	dhāma	
means	that
He	is	the	supreme	rest	or	abode	of	everything,	
pavitram	
means	that	He	is	pure,
untainted	by	material	contamination,	
puruṣam	
means	that	He	is	the	supreme
enjoyer,	
divyam,	
transcendental,	
ādi-devam,
	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead,	
ajam,	
the	unborn,	and	
vibhum,	
the	greatest,	the	all-pervading.
Now	one	may	think	that	because	Kṛṣṇa	was	the	friend	of	Arjuna,	Arjunawas	telling	Him	all	this	by	way	of	flattery,	but	Arjuna,	just	to	drive	out	this
kind	of	doubt	from	the	minds	of	the	readers	of	
Bhagavad-	gītā,	
substantiates
these	praises	in	the	next	verse	when	he	says	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	accepted	as	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	not	only	by	himself	but	by	authorities	like
the	sage	Nārada,	Asita,	Devala,	Vyāsadeva	and	so	on.	These	are	great
personalities	who	distribute	the	Vedic	knowledge	as	it	is	accepted	by	all
ācāryas
.	Therefore	Arjuna	tells	Kṛṣṇa	that	he	accepts	whatever	He	says	to	be
completely	perfect.	
Sarvam	etad	ṛtaṁ	manye:
	"I	accept	everything	You	say	to
be	true."	Arjuna	also	says	that	the	personality	of	the	Lord	is	very	difficult	to
understand	and	that	He	cannot	be	known	even	by	the	great	demigods.	This
means	that	the	Lord	cannot	even	be	known	by	personalities	greater	than
human	beings.	So	how	can	a	human	being	understand	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	without
becoming	His	devotee?
Therefore	
Bhagavad-gītā	
should	be	taken	up	in	a	spirit	of	devotion.	One
should	not	think	that	he	is	equal	to	Kṛṣṇa,	nor	should	he	think	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	an
ordinary	personality	or	even	a	very	great	personality.	Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	is	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	at	least	theoretically,	according	to	the
statements	of	
Bhagavad-gītā	
or	the	statements	of	Arjuna,	the	person	who	is
trying	to	understand	the	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
We	should	therefore	at	least
theoretically	accept	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	and
with	that	submissive	spirit	we	can	understand	the	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
Unless	one
reads	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
in	a	submissive	spirit,	it	is	very	difficult	to
understand	
Bhagavad-gītā	
because	it	is	a	great	mystery.
Just	what	is	the	
Bhagavad-gītā?	
The	purpose	of	
Bhagavad-	gītā
	is	to
deliver	mankind	from	the	nescience	of	material	existence.	Every	man	is	in
difficulty	in	so	many	ways,	as	Arjuna	also	was	in	difficulty	in	having	to	fight
the	Battle	of	Kurukṣetra.	Arjuna	surrendered	unto	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa,	and	consequently
this	
Bhagavad-gītā	
was	spoken.	Not	only	Arjuna,	but	every	one	of	us	is	full	of
anxieties	because	of	this	material	existence.	Our	very	existence	is	in	the
atmosphere	of	nonexistence.	Actually	we	are	not	meant	to	be	threatened	by
nonexistence.	Our	existence	is	eternal.	But	somehow	or	other	we	are	put	into
asat.	Asat	
refers	to	that	which	does	not	exist.
Out	of	so	many	human	beings	who	are	suffering,	there	are	a	few	who	are
actually	inquiring	about	their	position,	as	to	what	they	are,	why	they	are	put
into	this	awkward	position	and	so	on.	Unless	one	is	awakened	to	this	position
of	questioning	his	suffering,	unless	he	realizes	that	he	doesn't	want	suffering
but	rather	wants	to	make	a	solution	to	all	sufferings,	then	one	is	not	to	be
considered	a	perfect	human	being.	Humanity	begins	when	this	sort	of	inquiryis	awakened	in	one's	mind.	In	the	
Brahma-sūtra	
this	inquiry	is	called
"
brahma-jijñāsā
."	Every	activity	of	the	human	being	is	to	be	considered	a
failure	unless	he	inquires	about	the	nature	of	the	Absolute.	Therefore	those
who	begin	to	question	why	they	are	suffering	or	where	they	came	from	and
where	they	shall	go	after	death	are	proper	students	for	understanding
Bhagavad-gītā.	
The	sincere	student	should	also	have	a	firm	respect	for	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Such	a	student	was	Arjuna.
Lord	Kṛṣṇa	descends	specifically	to	reestablish	the	real	purpose	of	life
when	man	forgets	that	purpose.	Even	then,	out	of	many,	many	human	beings
who	awaken,	there	may	be	one	who	actually	enters	the	spirit	of	understanding
his	position,	and	for	him	this	
Bhagavad-	gītā
	is	spoken.	Actually	we	are	all
followed	by	the	tiger	of	nescience,	but	the	Lord	is	very	merciful	upon	living
entities,	especially	human	beings.	To	this	end	He	spoke	the	
Bhagavad-gītā,
making	His	friend	Arjuna	His	student.
Being	an	associate	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	Arjuna	was	above	all	ignorance,	but
Arjuna	was	put	into	ignorance	on	the	Battlefield	of	Kurukṣetra	just	to	question
Lord	Kṛṣṇa	about	the	problems	of	life	so	that	the	Lord	could	explain	them	for
the	benefit	of	future	generations	of	human	beings	and	chalk	out	the	plan	of
life.	Then	man	could	act	accordingly	and	perfect	the	mission	of	human	life.
The	subject	of	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
entails	the	comprehension	of	five	basic
truths.	First	of	all,	the	science	of	God	is	explained	and	then	the	constitutional
position	of	the	living	entities,	
jīvas.	
There	is	
īśvara,	
which	means	controller,
and	there	are	
jīvas,	
the	living	entities	which	are	controlled.	If	a	living	entity
says	that	he	is	not	controlled	but	that	he	is	free,	then	he	is	insane.	The	living
being	is	controlled	in	every	respect,	at	least	in	his	conditioned	life.	So	in	the
Bhagavad-gītā	
the	subject	matter	deals	with	the	
īśvara
,	the	supreme
controller,	and	the	
jīvas,	
the	controlled	living	entities.	
Prakṛti
	(material	nature)
and	time	(the	duration	of	existence	of	the	whole	universe	or	the	manifestation
of	material	nature)	and	
karma	
(activity)	are	also	discussed.	The	cosmic
manifestation	is	full	of	different	activities.	All	living	entities	are	engaged	in
different	activities.	From	
Bhagavad-gītā	
we	must	learn	what	God	is,	what	the
living	entities	are,	what	
prakṛti	
is,	what	the	cosmic	manifestation	is	and	how	it
is	controlled	by	time,	and	what	the	activities	of	the	living	entities	are.
Out	of	these	five	basic	subject	matters	in	
Bhagavad-gītā	
it	is	established
that	the	Supreme	Godhead,	or	Kṛṣṇa,	or	Brahman,	or	supreme	controller,	or
Paramātmā–you	may	use	whatever	name	you	like–is	the	greatest	of	all.	The
living	beings	are	in	quality	like	the	supreme	controller.	For	instance,	the	Lord
has	control	over	the	universal	affairs,	over	material	nature,	etc.,	as	will	beexplained	in	the	later	chapters	of	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
Material	nature	is	not
independant.	She	is	acting	under	the	directions	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	As	Lord
Kṛṣṇa	says,	"
Prakṛti
	is	working	under	My	direction."	When	we	see	wonderful
things	happening	in	the	cosmic	nature,	we	should	know	that	behind	this
cosmic	manifestation	there	is	a	controller.	Nothing	could	be	manifested
without	being	controlled.	It	is	childish	not	to	consider	the	controller.	For
instance,	a	child	may	think	that	an	automobile	is	quite	wonderful	to	be	able	to
run	without	a	horse	or	other	animal	pulling	it,	but	a	sane	man	knows	the
nature	of	the	automobile's	engineering	arrangement.	He	always	knows	that
behind	the	machinery	there	is	a	man,	a	driver.	Similarly,	the	Supreme	Lord	is	a
driver	under	whose	direction	everything	is	working.	Now	the	
jīvas,	
or	the
living	entities,	have	been	accepted	by	the	Lord,	as	we	will	note	in	the	later
chapters,	as	His	parts	and	parcels.	A	particle	of	gold	is	also	gold,	a	drop	of
water	from	the	ocean	is	also	salty,	and	similarly,	we	the	living	entities,	being
part	and	parcel	of	the	supreme	controller,	
īsvara
,	or	Bhagavān,	Lord	Śrī
Kṛṣṇa,	have	all	the	qualities	of	the	Supreme	Lord	in	minute	quantity	because
we	are	minute	
īśvaras
,	subordinate	
īśvaras
.	We	are	trying	to	control	nature,	as
presently	we	are	trying	to	control	space	or	planets,	and	this	tendency	to
control	is	there	because	it	is	in	Kṛṣṇa.	But	although	we	have	a	tendency	to	lord
it	over	material	nature,	we	should	know	that	we	are	not	the	supreme	controller.
This	is	explained	in	
Bhagavad-gītā.
What	is	material	nature?	This	is	also	explained	in	
Gītā	
as	inferior	
prakṛti,
inferior	nature.	The	living	entity	is	explained	as	the	superior	
prakṛti.	Prakṛti
	is
always	under	control,	whether	inferior	or	superior.	
Prakṛti
	is	female,	and	she
is	controlled	by	the	Lord	just	as	the	activities	of	a	wife	are	controlled	by	the
husband.	
Prakṛti
	is	always	subordinate,	predominated	by	the	Lord,	who	is	the
predominator.	The	living	entities	and	material	nature	are	both	predominated,
controlled	by	the	Supreme	Lord.	According	to	the	
Gītā,	
the	living	entities,
although	parts	and	parcels	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	are	to	be	considered	
prakṛti.
This	is	clearly	mentioned	in	the	Seventh	Chapter,	fifth	verse	of	
Bhagavad-
gītā:	
"
Apareyam	itas	tv	anyām
."	"This	
prakṛti
	is	My	lower	nature."	"
Prakṛtiṁ
viddhi	me	parām	jīva-bhūtāṁ	mahā-bāho	yayedaṁ	dhāryate	jagat
."	And
beyond	this	there	is	another	
prakṛti:	jīva-bhūtām,	
the	living	entity.
Prakṛti	
itself	is	constituted	by	three	qualities:	the	mode	of	goodness,	the
mode	of	passion	and	the	mode	of	ignorance.	Above	these	modes	there	is
eternal	time,	and	by	a	combination	of	these	modes	of	nature	and	under	the
control	and	purview	of	eternal	time	there	are	activities	which	are	called
karma.	
These	activities	are	being	carried	out	from	time	immemorial,	and	weare	suffering	or	enjoying	the	fruits	of	our	activities.	For	instance,	suppose	I	am
a	businessman	and	have	worked	very	hard	with	intelligence	and	have	amassed
a	great	bank	balance.	Then	I	am	an	enjoyer.	But	then	say	I	have	lost	all	my
money	in	business;	then	I	am	a	sufferer.	Similarly,	in	every	field	of	life	we
enjoy	the	results	of	our	work,	or	we	suffer	the	results.	This	is	called	
karma
.
Īśvara
	(the	Supreme	Lord),	
jīva
	(the	living	entity),	
prakṛti
	(nature),	eternal
time	and	
karma
	(activity)	are	all	explained	in	the	
Bhagavad-	gītā.	
Out	of	these
five,	the	Lord,	the	living	entities,	material	nature	and	time	are	eternal.	The
manifestation	of	
prakṛti	
may	be	temporary,	but	it	is	not	false.	Some
philosophers	say	that	the	manifestation	of	material	nature	is	false,	but
according	to	the	philosophy	of	
Bhagavad-gītā	
or	according	to	the	philosophy
of	the	Vaiṣṇavas,	this	is	not	so.	The	manifestation	of	the	world	is	not	accepted
as	false;	it	is	accepted	as	real,	but	temporary.	It	is	likened	unto	a	cloud	which
moves	across	the	sky,	or	the	coming	of	the	rainy	season	which	nourishes
grains.	As	soon	as	the	rainy	season	is	over	and	as	soon	as	the	cloud	goes	away,
all	the	crops	which	were	nourished	by	the	rain	dry	up.	Similarly,	this	material
manifestation	takes	place	at	a	certain	interval,	stays	for	a	while	and	then
disappears.	Such	are	the	workings	of	
prakṛti	
But	this	cycle	is	working
eternally.	Therefore	
prakrti	
is	eternal;	it	is	not	false.	The	Lord	refers	to	this	as
"My	
prakṛti
."	This	material	nature	is	the	separated	energy	of	the	Supreme
Lord,	and	similarly	the	living	entities	are	also	the	energy	of	the	Supreme	Lord,
but	they	are	not	separated.	They	are	eternally	related.	So	the	Lord,	the	living
entity,	material	nature	and	time	are	all	interrelated	and	are	all	eternal.
However,	the	other	item,	
karma
,	is	not	eternal.	The	effects	of	
karma
	may	be
very	old	indeed.	We	are	suffering	or	enjoying	the	results	of	our	activities	from
time	immemorial,	but	we	can	change	the	results	of	our	
karma
,	or	our	activity,
and	this	change	depends	on	the	perfection	of	our	knowledge.	We	are	engaged
in	various	activities.	Undoubtedly	we	do	not	know	what	sort	of	activities	we
should	adopt	to	gain	relief	from	the	actions	and	reactions	of	all	these
activities,	but	this	is	also	explained	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā.
The	position	of	
īsvara
	is	that	of	supreme	consciousness.	The	
jīvas
,	or	the
living	entities,	being	parts	and	parcels	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	are	also
conscious.	Both	the	living	entity	and	material	nature	are	explained	as	
prakṛti,
the	energy	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	but	one	of	the	two,	the	
jīva
,	is	conscious.	The
other	
prakṛti	
is	not	conscious.	That	is	the	difference.	Therefore	the	
jīva-prakṛti
is	called	superior	because	the	
jīva
	has	consciousness	which	is	similar	to	the
Lord's.	The	Lord's	is	supreme	consciousness,	however,	and	one	should	not
claim	that	the	
jīva
,	the	living	entity,	is	also	supremely	conscious.	The	livingbeing	cannot	be	supremely	conscious	at	any	stage	of	his	perfection,	and	the
theory	that	he	can	be	so	is	a	misleading	theory.	Conscious	he	may	be,	but	he	is
not	perfectly	or	supremely	conscious.
The	distinction	between	the	
jīva	
and	the	
īśvara
	will	be	explained	in	the
Thirteenth	Chapter	of	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
The	Lord	is	
kṣetra-jñaḥ,	
conscious,	as	is
the	living	being,	but	the	living	being	is	conscious	of	his	particular	body,
whereas	the	Lord	is	conscious	of	all	bodies.	Because	He	lives	in	the	heart	of
every	living	being,	He	is	conscious	of	the	psychic	movements	of	the	particular
jīvas.	
We	should	not	forget	this.	It	is	also	explained	that	the	
Paramātmā,	
the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	is	living	in	everyone's	heart	as	
īśvara,	
as	the
controller,	and	that	He	is	giving	directions	for	the	living	entity	to	act	as	he
desires.	The	living	entity	forgets	what	to	do.	First	of	all	he	makes	a
determination	to	act	in	a	certain	way,	and	then	he	is	entangled	in	the	acts	and
reactions	of	his	own	
karma.	
After	giving	up	one	type	of	body,	he	enters
another	type	of	body,	as	we	put	on	and	take	off	old	clothes.	As	the	soul	thus
migrates,	he	suffers	the	actions	and	reactions	of	his	past	activities.	These
activities	can	be	changed	when	the	living	being	is	in	the	mode	of	goodness,	in
sanity,	and	understands	what	sort	of	activities	he	should	adopt.	If	he	does	so,
then	all	the	actions	and	reactions	of	his	past	activities	can	be	changed.
Consequently,	
karma	
is	not	eternal.	Therefore	we	stated	that	of	the	five	items
(
īśvara,	jīva,	prakṛti	
time	and	
karma
)	four	are	eternal,	whereas	
karma
	is	not
eternal.
The	supreme	conscious	
īśvara
	is	similar	to	the	living	entity	in	this	way:
both	the	consciousness	of	the	Lord	and	that	of	the	living	entity	are
transcendental.	It	is	not	that	consciousness	is	generated	by	the	association	of
matter.	That	is	a	mistaken	idea.	The	theory	that	consciousness	develops	under
certain	circumstances	of	material	combination	is	not	accepted	in	the
Bhagavad-gītā.	
Consciousness	may	be	pervertedly	reflected	by	the	covering
of	material	circumstances,	just	as	light	reflected	through	colored	glass	may
appear	to	be	a	certain	color,	but	the	consciousness	of	the	Lord	is	not	materially
affected.	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	says,	"
mayādhyakṣeṇa	prakṛtiḥ
."	When	He	descends	into
the	material	universe,	His	consciousness	is	not	materially	affected.	If	He	were
so	affected,	He	would	be	unfit	to	speak	on	transcendental	matters	as	He	does
in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
One	cannot	say	anything	about	the	transcendental	world
without	being	free	from	materially	contaminated	consciousness.	So	the	Lord	is
not	materially	contaminated.	Our	consciousness,	at	the	present	moment,
however,	is	materially	contaminated.	The	
Bhagavad-gītā	
teaches	that	we	have
to	purify	this	materially	contaminated	consciousness.	In	pure	consciousness,our	actions	will	be	dovetailed	to	the	will	of	
īśvara,	
and	that	will	make	us
happy.	It	is	not	that	we	have	to	cease	all	activities.	Rather,	our	activities	are	to
be	purified,	and	purified	activities	are	called	
bhakti.	
Activities	in	
bhakti	
appear
to	be	like	ordinary	activities,	but	they	are	not	contaminated.	An	ignorant
person	may	see	that	a	devotee	is	acting	or	working	like	an	ordinary	man,	but
such	a	person	with	a	poor	fund	of	knowledge	does	not	know	that	the	activities
of	the	devotee	or	of	the	Lord	are	not	contaminated	by	impure	consciousness	or
matter.	They	are	transcendental	to	the	three	modes	of	nature.	We	should	know,
however,	that	at	this	point	our	consciousness	is	contaminated.
When	we	are	materially	contaminated,	we	are	called	conditioned.	False
consciousness	is	exhibited	under	the	impression	that	I	am	a	product	of
material	nature.	This	is	called	false	ego.	One	who	is	absorbed	in	the	thought	of
bodily	conceptions	cannot	understand	his	situation.	
Bhagavad-	gītā	
was
spoken	to	liberate	one	from	the	bodily	conception	of	life,	and	Arjuna	put
himself	in	this	position	in	order	to	receive	this	information	from	the	Lord.	One
must	become	free	from	the	bodily	conception	of	life;	that	is	the	preliminary
activity	for	the	transcendentalist.	One	who	wants	to	become	free,	who	wants
to	become	liberated,	must	first	of	all	learn	that	he	is	not	this	material	body.
Mukti	
or	liberation	means	freedom	from	material	consciousness.	In	the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
also	the	definition	of	liberation	is	given:	
Mukti	
means
liberation	from	the	contaminated	consciousness	of	this	material	world	and
situation	in	pure	consciousness.	All	the	instructions	of	
Bhagavad-gītā	
are
intended	to	awaken	this	pure	consciousness,	and	therefore	we	find	at	the	last
stage	of	the	
Gītā's	
instructions	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	asking	Arjuna	whether	he	is	now
in	purified	consciousness.	Purified	consciousness	means	acting	in	accordance
with	the	instructions	of	the	Lord.	This	is	the	whole	sum	and	substance	of
purified	consciousness.	Consciousness	is	already	there	because	we	are	part
and	parcel	of	the	Lord,	but	for	us	there	is	the	affinity	of	being	affected	by	the
inferior	modes.	But	the	Lord,	being	the	Supreme,	is	never	affected.	That	is	the
difference	between	the	Supreme	Lord	and	the	conditioned	souls.
What	is	this	consciousness?	This	consciousness	is	"I	am."	Then	what	am	I?
In	contaminated	consciousness	"I	am"	means	"I	am	the	lord	of	all	I	survey.	I
am	the	enjoyer."	The	world	revolves	because	every	living	being	thinks	that	he
is	the	lord	and	creator	of	the	material	world.	Material	consciousness	has	two
psychic	divisions.	One	is	that	I	am	the	creator,	and	the	other	is	that	I	am	the
enjoyer.	But	actually	the	Supreme	Lord	is	both	the	creator	and	the	enjoyer,	and
the	living	entity,	being	part	and	parcel	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	is	neither	the
creator	nor	the	enjoyer,	but	a	cooperator.	He	is	the	created	and	the	enjoyed.For	instance,	a	part	of	a	machine	cooperates	with	the	whole	machine;	a	part	of
the	body	cooperates	with	the	whole	body.	The	hands,	feet,	eyes,	legs	and	so	on
are	all	parts	of	the	body,	but	they	are	not	actually	the	enjoyers.	The	stomach	is
the	enjoyer.	The	legs	move,	the	hands	supply	food,	the	teeth	chew	and	all	parts
of	the	body	are	engaged	in	satisfying	the	stomach	because	the	stomach	is	the
principal	factor	that	nourishes	the	body's	organization.	Therefore	everything	is
given	to	the	stomach.	One	nourishes	the	tree	by	watering	its	root,	and	one
nourishes	the	body	by	feeding	the	stomach,	for	if	the	body	is	to	be	kept	in	a
healthy	state,	then	the	parts	of	the	body	must	cooperate	to	feed	the	stomach.
Similarly,	the	Supreme	Lord	is	the	enjoyer	and	the	creator,	and	we,	as
subordinate	living	beings,	are	meant	to	cooperate	to	satisfy	Him.	This
cooperation	will	actually	help	us,	just	as	food	taken	by	the	stomach	will	help
all	other	parts	of	the	body.	If	the	fingers	of	the	hand	think	that	they	should	take
the	food	themselves	instead	of	giving	it	to	the	stomach,	then	they	will	be
frustrated.	The	central	figure	of	creation	and	of	enjoyment	is	the	Supreme
Lord,	and	the	living	entities	are	cooperators.	By	cooperation	they	enjoy.	The
relation	is	also	like	that	of	the	master	and	the	servant.	If	the	master	is	fully
satisfied,	then	the	servant	is	satisfied.	Similarly,	the	Supreme	Lord	should	be
satisfied,	although	the	tendency	to	become	the	creator	and	the	tendency	to
enjoy	the	material	world	are	there	also	in	the	living	entities	because	these
tendencies	are	there	in	the	Supreme	Lord	who	has	created	the	manifested
cosmic	world.
We	shall	find,	therefore,	in	this	
Bhagavad-gītā	
that	the	complete	whole	is
comprised	of	the	supreme	controller,	the	controlled	living	entities,	the	cosmic
manifestation,	eternal	time,	and	
karma
,	or	activities,	and	all	of	these	are
explained	in	this	text.	All	of	these	taken	completely	form	the	complete	whole,
and	the	complete	whole	is	called	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth.	The	complete
whole	and	the	complete	Absolute	Truth	are	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead,	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.	All	manifestations	are	due	to	His	different	energies.	He	
is
the	complete	whole.
It	is	also	explained	in	the	
Gītā
	that	impersonal	Brahman	is	also	subordinate
to	the	complete.	Brahman	is	more	explicitly	explained	in	the	
Brahma-sūtra	
to
be	like	the	rays	of	the	sunshine.	The	impersonal	Brahman	is	the	shining	rays
of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Impersonal	Brahman	is	incomplete
realization	of	the	absolute	whole,	and	so	also	is	the	conception	of	Paramātmā
in	the	Twelfth	Chapter.	There	it	shall	be	seen	that	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead,	Puruṣottama,	is	above	both	impersonal	Brahman	and	the	partial
realization	of	Paramātmā.	The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is	called	
sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha
.	The	
Brahma-saṁhitā	
begins	in	this	way:	
īśvaraḥ
paramaḥ	kṛṣṇaḥ	sac-cid-ānanda-	vigrahaḥ	/	anādir	ādir	govindaḥ	sarva-
kāraṇa-kāraṇam.	
"Kṛṣṇa	is	the	cause	of	all	causes.	He	is	the	primal	cause,	and
He	is	the	very	form	of	eternalPictures	Part	1
being,	knowledge	and	bliss."	Impersonal	Brahman	realization	is	the
realization	of	His	
sat	
(being)	feature.	Paramātmā	realization	is	the	realization
of	the	
cit	
(eternal	knowledge)	feature.	But	realization	of	the	Personality	of
Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	is	realization	of	all	the	transcendental	features:	
sat,	cit	
and
ānanda	
(being,	knowledge,	bliss)	in	complete	
vigraha	
(form).
People	with	less	intelligence	consider	the	Supreme	Truth	to	be	impersonal,
but	He	is	a	transcendental	person,	and	this	is	confirmed	in	all	Vedic	literatures.
Nityo	nityānām	cetanaś	cetanānām.	As	
we	are	all	individual	living	beings	and
have	our	individuality,	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth	is	also,	in	the	ultimate
issue,	a	person,	and	realization	of	the	Personality	of	Godhead	is	realization	of
all	of	the	transcendental	features.	The	complete	whole	is	not	formless.	If	He	is
formless,	or	if	He	is	less	than	any	other	thing,	then	He	cannot	be	the	complete
whole.	The	complete	whole	must	have	everything	within	our	experience	and
beyond	our	experience,	otherwise	it	cannot	be	complete.	The	complete	whole,
Personality	of	Godhead,	has	immense	potencies.
How	Kṛṣṇa	is	acting	in	different	potencies	is	also	explained	in	
Bhagavad-
gītā.
	This	phenomenal	world	or	material	world	in	which	we	are	placed	is	also
complete	in	itself	because	the	twenty-four	elements	of	which	this	material
universe	is	a	temporary	manifestation,	according	to	Sāṅkhya	philosophy,	are
completely	adjusted	to	produce	complete	resources	which	are	necessary	for
the	maintenance	and	subsistence	of	this	universe.	There	is	nothing	extraneous;
nor	is	there	anything	needed.	This	manifestation	has	its	own	time	fixed	by	the
energy	of	the	supreme	whole,	and	when	its	time	is	complete,	these	temporary
manifestations	will	be	annihilated	by	the	complete	arrangement	of	the
complete.	There	is	complete	facility	for	the	small	complete	units,	namely	the
living	entities,	to	realize	the	complete,	and	all	sorts	of	incompleteness	are
experienced	due	to	incomplete	knowledge	of	the	complete.	So	
Bhagavad-gītā
contains	the	complete	knowledge	of	Vedic	wisdom.
All	Vedic	knowledge	is	infallible,	and	Hindus	accept	Vedic	knowledge	to	be
complete	and	infallible.	For	example,	cow	dung	is	the	stool	of	an	animal,	and
according	to	
smṛti
	or	Vedic	injunction,	if	one	touches	the	stool	of	an	animal	he
has	to	take	a	bath	to	purify	himself.	But	in	the	Vedic	scriptures	cow	dung	is
considered	to	be	a	purifying	agent.	One	might	consider	this	to	be
contradictory,	but	it	is	accepted	because	it	is	Vedic	injunction,	and	indeed	by
accepting	this,	one	will	not	commit	a	mistake;	subsequently	it	has	been	proved
by	modern	science	that	cow	dung	contains	all	antiseptic	properties.	So	Vedic
knowledge	is	complete	because	it	is	above	all	doubts	and	mistakes,	andBhagavad-gītā
	is	the	essence	of	all	Vedic	knowledge.
Vedic	knowledge	is	not	a	question	of	research.	Our	research	work	is
imperfect	because	we	are	researching	things	with	imperfect	senses.	We	have
to	accept	perfect	knowledge	which	comes	down,	as	is	stated	in	
Bhagavad-gītā,
by	the	
paramparā	
disciplic	succession.	We	have	to	receive	knowledge	from
the	proper	source	in	disciplic	succession	beginning	with	the	supreme	spiritual
master,	the	Lord	Himself,	and	handed	down	to	a	succession	of	spiritual
masters.	Arjuna,	the	student	who	took	lessons	from	Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa,	accepts
everything	that	He	says	without	contradicting	Him.	One	is	not	allowed	to
accept	one	portion	of	
Bhagavad-gītā	
and	not	another.	No.	We	must	accept
Bhagavad-gītā	
without	interpretation,	without	deletion	and	without	our	own
whimsical	participation	in	the	matter.	The	
Gītā	
should	be	taken	as	the	most
perfect	presentation	of	Vedic	knowledge.	Vedic	knowledge	is	received	from
transcendental	sources,	and	the	first	words	were	spoken	by	the	Lord	Himself.
The	words	spoken	by	the	Lord	are	different	from	words	spoken	by	a	person	of
the	mundane	world	who	is	infected	with	four	defects.	A	mundaner	1)	is	sure	to
commit	mistakes,	2)	is	invariably	illusioned,	3)	has	the	tendency	to	cheat
others	and	4)	is	limited	by	imperfect	senses.	With	these	four	imperfections,
one	cannot	deliver	perfect	information	of	all-pervading	knowledge.
Vedic	knowledge	is	not	imparted	by	such	defective	living	entities.	It	was
imparted	unto	the	heart	of	Brahmā,	the	first	created	living	being,	and	Brahmā
in	his	turn	disseminated	this	knowledge	to	his	sons	and	disciples,	as	he
originally	received	it	from	the	Lord.	The	Lord	is	
pūrṇam,	
all-perfect,	and	there
is	no	possibility	of	His	becoming	subjected	to	the	laws	of	material	nature.	One
should	therefore	be	intelligent	enough	to	know	that	the	Lord	is	the	only
proprietor	of	everything	in	the	universe	and	that	He	is	the	original	creator,	the
creator	of	Brahmā.	In	the	Eleventh	Chapter	the	Lord	is	addressed	as
prapitāmaha	
because	Brahmā	is	addressed	as	
pitāmaha,	
the	grandfather,	and
He	is	the	creator	of	the	grandfather.	So	no	one	should	claim	to	be	the
proprietor	of	anything;	one	should	accept	only	things	which	are	set	aside	for
him	by	the	Lord	as	his	quota	for	his	maintenance.
There	are	many	examples	given	of	how	we	are	to	utilize	those	things	which
are	set	aside	for	us	by	the	Lord.	This	is	also	explained	in	
Bhagavad-	gītā.	
In
the	beginning,	Arjuna	decided	that	he	should	not	fight	in	the	Battle	of
Kurukṣetra.	This	was	his	own	decision.	Arjuna	told	the	Lord	that	it	was	not
possible	for	him	to	enjoy	the	kingdom	after	killing	his	own	kinsmen.	This
decision	was	based	on	the	body	because	he	was	thinking	that	the	body	was
himself	and	that	his	bodily	relations	or	expansions	were	his	brothers,	nephews,brothers-in-law,	grandfathers	and	so	on.	He	was	thinking	in	this	way	to	satisfy
his	bodily	demands.	
Bhagavad-gītā	
was	spoken	by	the	Lord	just	to	change	this
view,	and	at	the	end	Arjuna	decides	to	fight	under	the	directions	of	the	Lord
when	he	says,	"
kariṣye	vacanaṁ	tava
."	"I	shall	act	according	to	Thy	word."
In	this	world	man	is	not	meant	to	toil	like	hogs.	He	must	be	intelligent	to
realize	the	importance	of	human	life	and	refuse	to	act	like	an	ordinary	animal.
A	human	being	should	realize	the	aim	of	his	life,	and	this	direction	is	given	in
all	Vedic	literatures,	and	the	essence	is	given	in	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
Vedic
literature	is	meant	for	human	beings,	not	for	animals.	Animals	can	kill	other
living	animals,	and	there	is	no	question	of	sin	on	their	part,	but	if	a	man	kills
an	animal	for	the	satisfaction	of	his	uncontrolled	taste,	he	must	be	responsible
for	breaking	the	laws	of	nature.	In	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
it	is	clearly	explained
that	there	are	three	kinds	of	activities	according	to	the	different	modes	of
nature:	the	activities	of	goodness,	of	passion	and	of	ignorance.	Similarly,	there
are	three	kinds	of	eatables	also:	eatables	in	goodness,	passion	and	ignorance.
All	of	this	is	clearly	described,	and	if	we	properly	utilize	the	instructions	of
Bhagavad-gītā,	
then	our	whole	life	will	become	purified,	and	ultimately	we
will	be	able	to	reach	the	destination	which	is	beyond	this	material	sky.
That	destination	is	called	the	
sanātana
	sky,	the	eternal	spiritual	sky.	In	this
material	world	we	find	that	everything	is	temporary.	It	comes	into	being,	stays
for	some	time,	produces	some	by-products,	dwindles	and	then	vanishes.	That
is	the	law	of	the	material	world,	whether	we	use	as	an	example	this	body,	or	a
piece	of	fruit	or	anything.	But	beyond	this	temporary	world	there	is	another
world	of	which	we	have	information.	This	world	consists	of	another	nature
which	is	
sanātana,	
eternal.	
Jīva
	is	also	described	as	
sanātana,	
eternal,	and	the
Lord	is	also	described	as	
sanātana
	in	the	Eleventh	Chapter.	We	have	an
intimate	relationship	with	the	Lord,	and	because	we	are	all	qualitatively	one—
the	
sanātana-dhāma
,	or	sky,	the	
sanātana
	Supreme	Personality	and	the
sanātana
	living	entities—the	whole	purpose	of	
Bhagavad-gītā
	is	to	revive	our
sanātana
	occupation,	or	
sanātana-	dharma
,	which	is	the	eternal	occupation	of
the	living	entity.	We	are	temporarily	engaged	in	different	activities,	but	all	of
these	activities	can	be	purified	when	we	give	up	all	these	temporary	activities
and	take	up	the	activities	which	are	prescribed	by	the	Supreme	Lord.	That	is
called	our	pure	life.
The	Supreme	Lord	and	His	transcendental	abode	are	both	
sanātana
,	as	are
the	living	entities,	and	the	combined	association	of	the	Supreme	Lord	and	the
living	entities	in	the	
sanātana
	abode	is	the	perfection	of	human	life.	The	Lord
is	very	kind	to	the	living	entities	because	they	are	His	sons.	Lord	Kṛṣṇadeclares	in	
Bhagavad-gītā,
	"
sarva-yoniṣu...ahaṁ	bīja-pradaḥ	pitā
."	"I	am	the
father	of	all."	Of	course	there	are	all	types	of	living	entities	according	to	their
various	
karmas,	
but	here	the	Lord	claims	that	He	is	the	father	of	all	of	them.
Therefore	the	Lord	descends	to	reclaim	all	of	these	fallen,	conditioned	souls	to
call	them	back	to	the	
sanātana	
eternal	sky	so	that	the	
sanātana	
living	entities
may	regain	their	eternal	
sanātana	
positions	in	eternal	association	with	the
Lord.	The	Lord	comes	Himself	in	different	incarnations,	or	He	sends	His
confidential	servants	as	sons	or	His	associates	or	
ācāryas	
to	reclaim	the
conditioned	souls.
Therefore,	
sanātana-dharma	
does	not	refer	to	any	sectarian	process	of
religion.	It	is	the	eternal	function	of	the	eternal	living	entities	in	relationship
with	the	eternal	Supreme	Lord.	
Sanātana-dharma	
refers,	as	stated	previously,
to	the	eternal	occupation	of	the	living	entity.	Rāmānujācārya	has	explained	the
word	
sanātana
	as	"that	which	has	neither	beginning	nor	end,"	so	when	we
speak	of	
sanātana-dharma,	
we	must	take	it	for	granted	on	the	authority	of	Śrī
Rāmānujācārya	that	it	has	neither	beginning	nor	end.
The	English	word	"religion"	is	a	little	different	from	
sanātana-	dharma.
Religion	conveys	the	idea	of	faith,	and	faith	may	change.	One	may	have	faith
in	a	particular	process,	and	he	may	change	this	faith	and	adopt	another,	but
sanātana-dharma	
refers	to	that	activity	which	cannot	be	changed.	For
instance,	liquidity	cannot	be	taken	from	water,	nor	can	heat	be	taken	from	fire.
Similarly,	the	eternal	function	of	the	eternal	living	entity	cannot	be	taken	from
the	living	entity.	
Sanātana-dharma
	is	eternally	integral	with	the	living	entity.
When	we	speak	of	
sanātana-dharma,	
therefore,	we	must	take	it	for	granted	on
the	authority	of	Śrī	Rāmānujācārya	that	it	has	neither	beginning	nor	end.	That
which	has	neither	end	nor	beginning	must	not	be	sectarian,	for	it	cannot	be
limited	by	any	boundaries.	Yet	those	belonging	to	some	sectarian	faith	will
wrongly	consider	that	
sanātana-dharma
	is	also	sectarian,	but	if	we	go	deeply
into	the	matter	and	consider	it	in	the	light	of	modern	science,	it	is	possible	for
us	to	see	that	
sanātana-dharma
	is	the	business	of	all	the	people	of	the	world–
nay,	of	all	the	living	entities	of	the	universe.
Non-
sanātana
	religious	faith	may	have	some	beginning	in	the	annals	of
human	history,	but	there	is	no	beginning	to	the	history	of	
sanātana-dharma
because	it	remains	eternally	with	the	living	entities.	Insofar	as	the	living
entities	are	concerned,	the	authoritative	
śāstras
	state	that	the	living	entity	has
neither	birth	nor	death.	In	the	
Gītā
	it	is	stated	that	the	living	entity	is	never
born,	and	he	never	dies.	He	is	eternal	and	indestructible,	and	he	continues	to
live	after	the	destruction	of	his	temporary	material	body.	In	reference	to	theconcept	of	
sanātana-dharma,	
we	must	try	to	understand	the	concept	of
religion	from	the	Sanskrit	root	meaning	of	the	word.	
Dharma	
refers	to	that
which	is	constantly	existing	with	the	particular	object.	We	conclude	that	there
is	heat	and	light	along	with	the	fire;	without	heat	and	light,	there	is	no
meaning	to	the	word	fire.	Similarly,	we	must	discover	the	essential	part	of	the
living	being,	that	part	which	is	his	constant	companion.	That	constant
companion	is	his	eternal	quality,	and	that	eternal	quality	is	his	eternal	religion.
When	Sanātana	Gosvāmī	asked	Śrī	Caitanya	Mahāprabhu	about	the
svarūpa	
of	every	living	being,	the	Lord	replied	that	the	
svarūpa	
or
constitutional	position	of	the	living	being	is	the	rendering	of	service	to	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	If	we	analyze	this	statement	of	Lord
Caitanya,	we	can	easily	see	that	every	living	being	is	constantly	engaged	in
rendering	service	to	another	living	being.	A	living	being	serves	other	living
beings	in	two	capacities.	By	doing	so,	the	living	entity	enjoys	life.	The	lower
animals	serve	human	beings	as	servants	serve	their	master.	A	serves	B	master,
B	serves	C	master	and	C	serves	D	master	and	so	on.	Under	these
circumstances,	we	can	see	that	one	friend	serves	another	friend,	the	mother
serves	the	son,	the	wife	serves	the	husband,	the	husband	serves	the	wife	and
so	on.	If	we	go	on	searching	in	this	spirit,	it	will	be	seen	that	there	is	no
exception	in	the	society	of	living	beings	to	the	activity	of	service.	The
politician	presents	his	manifesto	for	the	public	to	convince	them	of	his
capacity	for	service.	The	voters	therefore	give	the	politician	their	valuable
votes,	thinking	that	he	will	render	valuable	service	to	society.	The	shopkeeper
serves	the	customer,	and	the	artisan	serves	the	capitalist.	The	capitalist	serves
the	family,	and	the	family	serves	the	state	in	the	terms	of	the	eternal	capacity
of	the	eternal	living	being.	In	this	way	we	can	see	that	no	living	being	is
exempt	from	rendering	service	to	other	living	beings,	and	therefore	we	can
safely	conclude	that	service	is	the	constant	companion	of	the	living	being	and
that	the	rendering	of	service	is	the	eternal	religion	of	the	living	being.
Yet	man	professes	to	belong	to	a	particular	type	of	faith	with	reference	to
particular	time	and	circumstance	and	thus	claims	to	be	a	Hindu,	Muslim,
Christian,	Buddhist	or	any	other	sect.	Such	designations	are	non
-
	
sanātana-
dharma.	
A	Hindu	may	change	his	faith	to	become	a	Muslim,	or	a	Muslim	may
change	his	faith	to	become	a	Hindu,	or	a	Christian	may	change	his	faith	and	so
on.	But	in	all	circumstances	the	change	of	religious	faith	does	not	effect	the
eternal	occupation	of	rendering	service	to	others.	The	Hindu,	Muslim	or
Christian	in	all	circumstances	is	servant	of	someone.	Thus,	to	profess	a
particular	type	of	sect	is	not	to	profess	one's	
sanātana-	dharma.	
The	renderingof	service	is	
sanātana-dharma
.
Factually	we	are	related	to	the	Supreme	Lord	in	service.	The	Supreme	Lord
is	the	supreme	enjoyer,	and	we	living	entities	are	His	servitors.	We	are	created
for	His	enjoyment,	and	if	we	participate	in	that	eternal	enjoyment	with	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	we	become	happy.	We	cannot	become
happy	otherwise.	It	is	not	possible	to	be	happy	independantly,	just	as	no	one
part	of	the	body	can	be	happy	without	cooperating	with	the	stomach.	It	is	not
possible	for	the	living	entity	to	be	happy	without	rendering	transcendental
loving	service	unto	the	Supreme	Lord.
In	the	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
worship	of	different	demigods	or	rendering	service	to
them	is	not	approved.	It	is	stated	in	the	Seventh	Chapter,	twentieth	verse:
kāmais	tais	tair	hṛt-ajñānāḥ	prapadyante	'nya-devatāḥ
taṁ	taṁ	niyamam	āsthāya	prakṛtyā	niyatāḥ	svayā
"Those	whose	minds	are	distorted	by	material	desires	surrender	unto
demigods	and	follow	the	particular	rules	and	regulations	of	worship	according
to	their	own	natures."	(Bg.	7.20)	Here	it	is	plainly	said	that	those	who	are
directed	by	lust	worship	the	demigods	and	not	the	Supreme	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.	When
we	mention	the	name	Kṛṣṇa,	we	do	not	refer	to	any	sectarian	name.	Kṛṣṇa
means	the	highest	pleasure,	and	it	is	confirmed	that	the	Supreme	Lord	is	the
reservoir	or	storehouse	of	all	pleasure.	We	are	all	hankering	after	pleasure.
Ānandamayo	'bhyāsāt.	
(Vs.	1.1.12)	The	living	entities,	like	the	Lord,	are	full
of	consciousness,	and	they	are	after	happiness.	The	Lord	is	perpetually	happy,
and	if	the	living	entities	associate	with	the	Lord,	cooperate	with	Him	and	take
part	in	His	association,	then	they	also	become	happy.
The	Lord	descends	to	this	mortal	world	to	show	His	pastimes	in	Vṛndāvana,
which	are	full	of	happiness.	When	Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	was	in	Vṛndāvana,	His
activities	with	His	cowherd	boy	friends,	with	His	damsel	friends,	with	the
inhabitants	of	Vṛndāvana	and	with	the	cows	were	all	full	of	happiness.	The
total	population	of	Vṛndāvana	knew	nothing	but	Kṛṣṇa.	But	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	even
discouraged	His	father	Nanda	Mahārāja	from	worshiping	the	demigod	Indra
because	He	wanted	to	establish	the	fact	that	people	need	not	worship	any
demigod.	They	need	only	worship	the	Supreme	Lord	because	their	ultimate
goal	is	to	return	to	His	abode.
The	abode	of	Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	is	described	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
Fifteenth
Chapter,	sixth	verse:na	tad	bhāsayate	sūryo	na	śaśāṅko	na	pāvakaḥ
yad	gatvā	na	nivartante	tad	dhāma	paramaṁ	mama
"That	abode	of	Mine	is	not	illumined	by	the	sun	or	moon,	nor	by	electricity.
And	anyone	who	reaches	it	never	comes	back	to	this	material	world."	(Bg.
15.6)
This	verse	gives	a	description	of	that	eternal	sky.	Of	course	we	have	a
material	conception	of	the	sky,	and	we	think	of	it	in	relationship	to	the	sun,
moon,	stars	and	so	on,	but	in	this	verse	the	Lord	states	that	in	the	eternal	sky
there	is	no	need	for	the	sun	nor	for	the	moon	nor	fire	of	any	kind	because	the
spiritual	sky	is	already	illuminated	by	the	
brahmajyoti,	
the	rays	emanating
from	the	Supreme	Lord.	We	are	trying	with	difficulty	to	reach	other	planets,
but	it	is	not	difficult	to	understand	the	abode	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	This	abode
is	referred	to	as	Goloka.	In	the	
Brahma-saṁhitā	
it	is	beautifully	described:
Goloka	eva	nivasaty	akhilātma-bhūtaḥ.	
The	Lord	resides	eternally	in	His
abode	Goloka,	yet	He	can	be	approached	from	this	world,	and	to	this	end	the
Lord	comes	to	manifest	His	real	form,	
sac-cid-	ānanda-vigraha.	
When	He
manifests	this	form,	there	is	no	need	for	our	imagining	what	He	looks	like.	To
discourage	such	imaginative	speculation,	He	descends	and	exhibits	Himself	as
He	is,	as	Śyāmasundara.	Unfortunately,	the	less	intelligent	deride	Him	because
He	comes	as	one	of	us	and	plays	with	us	as	a	human	being.	But	because	of
this	we	should	not	consider	that	the	Lord	is	one	of	us.	It	is	by	His	potency	that
He	presents	Himself	in	His	real	form	before	us	and	displays	His	pastimes,
which	are	prototypes	of	those	pastimes	found	in	His	abode.
In	the	effulgent	rays	of	the	spiritual	sky	there	are	innumerable	planets
floating.	The	
brahmajyoti	
emanates	from	the	supreme	abode,	Kṛṣṇaloka,	and
the	
ānandamaya-cinmaya	
planets,	which	are	not	material,	float	in	those	rays.
The	Lord	says,	
na	tad	bhāsayate	sūryo	na	śaśāṅko	na	pāvakaḥ	yad	gatvā	na
nivartante	tad	dhāma	paramaṁ	mama.	
One	who	can	approach	that	spiritual
sky	is	not	required	to	descend	again	to	the	material	sky.	In	the	material	sky,
even	if	we	approach	the	highest	planet	(Brahmaloka),	what	to	speak	of	the
moon,	we	will	find	the	same	conditions	of	life,	namely	birth,	death,	disease
and	old	age.	No	planet	in	the	material	universe	is	free	from	these	four
principles	of	material	existence.	Therefore	the	Lord	says	in	
Bhagavad-gītā,
ābrahma-bhuvanāl	lokāḥ	punar	āvartino	'rjuna.	
The	living	entities	are
traveling	from	one	planet	to	another,	not	by	mechanical	arrangement	but	by	a
spiritual	process.	This	is	also	mentioned:	
yānti	deva-vratā	devān	pitṝn	yānti
pitṛ-vratāḥ.	
No	mechanical	arrangement	is	necessary	if	we	want	interplanetarytravel.	The	
Gītā	
instructs:	
yānti	deva-vratā	devān.	
The	moon,	the	sun	and
higher	planets	are	called	
svargaloka.	
There	are	three	different	statuses	of
planets:	higher,	middle	and	lower	planetary	systems.	The	earth	belongs	to	the
middle	planetary	system.	
Bhagavad-gītā	
informs	us	how	to	travel	to	the
higher	planetary	systems	(
devaloka
)	with	a	very	simple	formula:	
yānti	deva-
vratā	devān.	
One	need	only	worship	the	particular	demigod	of	that	particular
planet	and	in	that	way	go	to	the	moon,	the	sun	or	any	of	the	higher	planetary
systems.
Yet	
Bhagavad-gītā	
does	not	advise	us	to	go	to	any	of	the	planets	in	this
material	world	because	even	if	we	go	to	Brahmaloka,	the	highest	planet,
through	some	sort	of	mechanical	contrivance	by	maybe	traveling	for	forty
thousand	years	(and	who	would	live	that	long?),	we	will	still	find	the	material
inconveniences	of	birth,	death,	disease	and	old	age.	But	one	who	wants	to
approach	the	supreme	planet,	Kṛṣṇaloka,	or	any	of	the	other	planets	within	the
spiritual	sky,	will	not	meet	with	these	material	inconveniences.	Amongst	all	of
the	planets	in	the	spiritual	sky	there	is	one	supreme	planet	called	Goloka
Vṛndāvana,	which	is	the	original	planet	in	the	abode	of	the	original
Personality	of	Godhead	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.	All	of	this	information	is	given	in
Bhagavad-gītā,	
and	we	are	given	through	its	instruction	information	how	to
leave	the	material	world	and	begin	a	truly	blissful	life	in	the	spiritual	sky.
In	the	Fifteenth	Chapter	of	the	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
the	real	picture	of	the
material	world	is	given.	It	is	said	there:
ūrdhva-mūlam	adhaḥ-śākham	aśvatthaṁ	prāhur	avyayam
chandāṁsi	yasya	parṇāni	yas	taṁ	veda	sa	veda-vit
"The	Supreme	Lord	said:	There	is	a	banyan	tree	which	has	its	roots	upward
and	its	branches	down,	and	the	Vedic	hymns	are	its	leaves.	One	who	knows
this	tree	is	the	knower	of	the	
Vedas
."	(Bg.	15.1)	Here	the	material	world	is
described	as	a	tree	whose	roots	are	upwards	and	branches	are	below.	We	have
experience	of	a	tree	whose	roots	are	upward:	if	one	stands	on	the	bank	of	a
river	or	any	reservoir	of	water,	he	can	see	that	the	trees	reflected	in	the	water
are	upside	down.	The	branches	go	downward	and	the	roots	upward.	Similarly,
this	material	world	is	a	reflection	of	the	spiritual	world.	The	material	world	is
but	a	shadow	of	reality.	In	the	shadow	there	is	no	reality	or	substantiality,	but
from	the	shadow	we	can	understand	that	there	is	substance	and	reality.	In	the
desert	there	is	no	water,	but	the	mirage	suggests	that	there	is	such	a	thing	as
water.	In	the	material	world	there	is	no	water,	there	is	no	happiness,	but	the
real	water	of	actual	happiness	is	there	in	the	spiritual	world.The	Lord	suggests	that	we	attain	the	spiritual	world	in	the	following
manner:
nirmāna-mohā	jita-saṅga-doṣā
adhyātma-nityā	vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ
dvandvair	vimuktāḥ	sukha-duḥkha-saṁjñair
gacchanty	amūḍhāḥ	padam	avyayaṁ	tat.
That	
padam	avyayam	
or	eternal	kingdom	can	be	reached	by	one	who	is
nirmāna-moha.	
What	does	this	mean?	We	are	after	designations.	Someone
wants	to	become	a	son,	someone	wants	to	become	Lord,	someone	wants	to
become	the	president	or	a	rich	man	or	a	king	or	something	else.	As	long	as	we
are	attached	to	these	designations,	we	are	attached	to	the	body	because
designations	belong	to	the	body.	But	we	are	not	these	bodies,	and	realizing
this	is	the	first	stage	in	spiritual	realization.	We	are	associated	with	the	three
modes	of	material	nature,	but	we	must	become	detached	through	devotional
service	to	the	Lord.	If	we	are	not	attached	to	devotional	service	to	the	Lord,
then	we	cannot	become	detached	from	the	modes	of	material	nature.
Designations	and	attachments	are	due	to	our	lust	and	desire,	our	wanting	to
lord	it	over	the	material	nature.	As	long	as	we	do	not	give	up	this	propensity
of	lording	it	over	material	nature,	there	is	no	possibility	of	returning	to	the
kingdom	of	the	Supreme,	the	
sanātana-dhāma.	
That	eternal	kingdom,	which
is	never	destroyed,	can	be	approached	by	one	who	is	not	bewildered	by	the
attractions	of	false	material	enjoyments,	who	is	situated	in	the	service	of	the
Supreme	Lord.	One	so	situated	can	easily	approach	that	supreme	abode.
Elsewhere	in	the	
Gītā	
it	is	stated:
avyakto	'kṣara	ity	uktas	tam	āhuḥ	paramāṁ	gatim
yaṁ	prāpya	na	nivartante	tad	dhāma	paramaṁ	mama.
Avyakta	
means	unmanifested.	Not	even	all	of	the	material	world	is	manifested
before	us.	Our	senses	are	so	imperfect	that	we	cannot	even	see	all	of	the	stars
within	this	material	universe.	In	Vedic	literature	we	can	receive	much
information	about	all	the	planets,	and	we	can	believe	it	or	not	believe	it.	All	of
the	important	planets	are	described	in	Vedic	literatures,	especially	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam,	
and	the	spiritual	world,	which	is	beyond	this	material	sky,	is
described	as	
avyakta,	
unmanifested.	One	should	desire	and	hanker	after	that
supreme	kingdom,	for	when	one	attains	that	kingdom,	he	does	not	have	toreturn	to	this	material	world.
Next,	one	may	raise	the	question	of	how	one	goes	about	approaching	that
abode	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	Information	of	this	is	given	in	the	Eighth	Chapter.
It	is	said	there:
anta-kāle	ca	mām	eva	smaran	muktvā	kalevaram
yaḥ	prayāti	sa	mad-bhāvam	yāti	nāsty	atra	saṁśayaḥ
"Anyone	who	quits	his	body,	at	the	end	of	life,	remembering	Me,	attains
immediately	to	My	nature;	and	there	is	no	doubt	of	this."	(Bg.	8.5)	One	who
thinks	of	Kṛṣṇa	at	the	time	of	his	death	goes	to	Kṛṣṇa.	One	must	remember	the
form	of	Kṛṣṇa;	if	he	quits	his	body	thinking	of	this	form,	he	approaches	the
spiritual	kingdom.	
Mad-bhāvaṁ	
refers	to	the	supreme	nature	of	the	Supreme
Being.	The	Supreme	Being	is	
sac-cid-ānanda-	vigraha
—eternal,	full	of
knowledge	and	bliss.	Our	present	body	is	not	
sac-cid-ānanda.	
It	is	
asat,	
not
sat.	
It	is	not	eternal;	it	is	perishable.	It	is	not	
cit,	
full	of	knowledge,	but	it	is
full	of	ignorance.	We	have	no	knowledge	of	the	spiritual	kingdom,	nor	do	we
even	have	perfect	knowledge	of	this	material	world	where	there	are	so	many
things	unknown	to	us.	The	body	is	also	
nirānanda;	
instead	of	being	full	of
bliss	it	is	full	of	misery.	All	of	the	miseries	we	experience	in	the	material
world	arise	from	the	body,	but	one	who	leaves	this	body	thinking	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	at	once	attains	a	
sac-cid-ānanda	
body,	as	is
promised	in	this	fifth	verse	of	the	Eighth	Chapter	where	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	says,	"He
attains	My	nature."
The	process	of	quitting	this	body	and	getting	another	body	in	the	material
world	is	also	organized.	A	man	dies	after	it	has	been	decided	what	form	of
body	he	will	have	in	the	next	life.	Higher	authorities,	not	the	living	entity
himself,	make	this	decision.	According	to	our	activities	in	this	life,	we	either
rise	or	sink.	This	life	is	a	preparation	for	the	next	life.	If	we	can	prepare,
therefore,	in	this	life	to	get	promotion	to	the	kingdom	of	God,	then	surely,
after	quitting	this	material	body,	we	will	attain	a	spiritual	body	just	like	the
Lord.
As	explained	before,	there	are	different	kinds	of	transcendentalists,	the
brahmavādi	paramātmāvādi	
and	the	devotee,	and,	as	mentioned,	in	the
brahmajyoti	
(spiritual	sky)	there	are	innumerable	spiritual	planets.	The
number	of	these	planets	is	far,	far	greater	than	all	of	the	planets	of	this
material	world.	This	material	world	has	been	approximated	as	only	one
quarter	of	the	creation.	In	this	material	segment	there	are	millions	and	billionsof	universes	with	trillions	of	planets	and	suns,	stars	and	moons.	But	this	whole
material	creation	is	only	a	fragment	of	the	total	creation.	Most	of	the	creation
is	in	the	spiritual	sky.	One	who	desires	to	merge	into	the	existence	of	the
Supreme	Brahman	is	at	once	transferred	to	the	
brahmajyoti	
of	the	Supreme
Lord	and	thus	attains	the	spiritual	sky.	The	devotee,	who	wants	to	enjoy	the
association	of	the	Lord,	enters	into	the	Vaikuṇṭha	planets,	which	are
innumerable,	and	the	Supreme	Lord	by	His	plenary	expansions	as	Nārāyaṇa
with	four	hands	and	with	different	names	like	Pradyumna,	Aniruddha,
Govinda,	etc.,	associates	with	him	there.	Therefore	at	the	end	of	life	the
transcendentalists	either	think	of	the	
brahmajyoti,	
the	Paramātmā	or	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.	In	all	cases	they	enter	into	the
spiritual	sky,	but	only	the	devotee,	or	he	who	is	in	personal	touch	with	the
Supreme	Lord,	enters	into	the	Vaikuṇṭha	planets.	The	Lord	further	adds	that	of
this	"there	is	no	doubt."	This	must	be	believed	firmly.	We	should	not	reject
that	which	does	not	tally	with	our	imagination;	our	attitude	should	be	that	of
Arjuna:	"I	believe	everything	that	You	have	said."	Therefore	when	the	Lord
says	that	at	the	time	of	death	whoever	thinks	of	Him	as	Brahman	or
Paramātmā	or	as	the	Personality	of	Godhead	certainly	enters	into	the	spiritual
sky,	there	is	no	doubt	about	it.	There	is	no	question	of	disbelieving	it.
The	information	on	how	to	think	of	the	Supreme	Being	at	the	time	of	death
is	also	given	in	the	
Gītā:
yaṁ	yaṁ	vāpi	smaran	bhāvaṁ	tyajaty	ante	kalevaram
taṁ	tam	evaiti	kaunteya	sadā	tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ
"In	whatever	condition	one	quits	his	present	body,	in	his	next	life	he	will	attain
to	that	state	of	being	without	fail."	(Bg.	8.6)	Material	nature	is	a	display	of	one
of	the	energies	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	In	the	
Viṣṇu	Purāṇa	
the	total	energies	of
the	Supreme	Lord	as	
Viṣṇu-śaktiḥ	parā	proktā,	
etc.,	are	delineated.	The
Supreme	Lord	has	diverse	and	innumerable	energies	which	are	beyond	our
conception;	however,	great	learned	sages	or	liberated	souls	have	studied	these
energies	and	have	analyzed	them	into	three	parts.	All	of	the	energies	are	of
Viṣṇu-śakti,	
that	is	to	say	they	are	different	potencies	of	Lord	Viṣṇu.	That
energy	is	
parā,	
transcendental.	Living	entities	also	belong	to	the	superior
energy,	as	has	already	been	explained.	The	other	energies,	or	material
energies,	are	in	the	mode	of	ignorance.	At	the	time	of	death	we	can	either
remain	in	the	inferior	energy	of	this	material	world,	or	we	can	transfer	to	the
energy	of	the	spiritual	world.In	life	we	are	accustomed	to	thinking	either	of	the	material	or	the	spiritual
energy.	There	are	so	many	literatures	which	fill	our	thoughts	with	the	material
energy–newspapers,	novels,	etc.	Our	thinking,	which	is	now	absorbed	in	these
literatures,	must	be	transferred	to	the	Vedic	literatures.	The	great	sages,
therefore,	have	written	so	many	Vedic	literatures	such	as	the	
Purāṇas,	
etc.	The
Purāṇas	
are	not	imaginative;	they	are	historical	records.	In	the	
Caitanya-
caritāmṛita	
there	is	the	following	verse:
māyā	mugdha	jiver	nāhi	svataḥ	kṛṣṇa-jñān
jivera	kṛpāya	kailā	kṛṣṇa	veda-purāṇa
	
(Cc.	Madhya	20.122)
The	forgetful	living	entities	or	conditioned	souls	have	forgotten	their
relationship	with	the	Supreme	Lord,	and	they	are	engrossed	in	thinking	of
material	activities.	Just	to	transfer	their	thinking	power	to	the	spiritual	sky,
Kṛṣṇa	has	given	a	great	number	of	Vedic	literatures.	First	He	divided	the
Vedas	
into	four,	then	He	explained	them	in	the	
Purāṇas,	
and	for	less	capable
people	He	wrote	the	
Mahābhārata.	
In	the	
Mahābhārata	
there	is	given	the
Bhagavad-gītā.	
Then	all	Vedic	literature	is	summarized	in	the	
Vedānta-sūtra,
and	for	future	guidance	He	gave	a	natural	commentation	on	the	
Vedānta-sutra,
called	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.	
We	must	always	engage	our	minds	in	reading
these	Vedic	literatures.	Just	as	materialists	engage	their	minds	in	reading
newspapers,	magazines	and	so	many	materialistic	literatures,	we	must	transfer
our	reading	to	these	literatures	which	are	given	to	us	by	Vyāsadeva;	in	that
way	it	will	be	possible	for	us	to	remember	the	Supreme	Lord	at	the	time	of
death.	That	is	the	only	way	suggested	by	the	Lord,	and	He	guarantees	the
result:	"There	is	no	doubt."	(Bg.	8.7)
tasmāt	sarveṣu	kāleṣu	mām	anusmara	yudhya	ca
mayy	arpita-mano-buddhir	mām	evaiṣyasy	asaṁśayaḥ
"Therefore,	Arjuna,	you	should	always	think	of	Me,	and	at	the	same	time	you
should	continue	your	prescribed	duty	and	fight.	With	your	mind	and	activities
always	fixed	on	Me,	and	everything	engaged	in	Me,	you	will	attain	to	Me
without	any	doubt."
He	does	not	advise	Arjuna	to	simply	remember	Him	and	give	up	his
occupation.	No,	the	Lord	never	suggests	anything	impractical.	In	this	material
world,	in	order	to	maintain	the	body	one	has	to	work.	Human	society	isdivided,	according	to	work,	into	four	divisions	of	social	order–
brāhmaṇa,
kṣatriya,	vaiśya,	śūdra.	
The	
brāhmaṇa	
class	or	intelligent	class	is	working	in
one	way,	the	
kṣatriya	
or	administrative	class	is	working	in	another	way,	and
the	mercantile	class	and	the	laborers	are	all	tending	to	their	specific	duties.	In
the	human	society,	whether	one	is	a	laborer,	merchant,	warrior,	administrator,
or	farmer,	or	even	if	one	belongs	to	the	highest	class	and	is	a	literary	man,	a
scientist	or	a	theologian,	he	has	to	work	in	order	to	maintain	his	existence.	The
Lord	therefore	tells	Arjuna	that	he	need	not	give	up	his	occupation,	but	while
he	is	engaged	in	his	occupation	he	should	remember	Kṛṣṇa.	If	he	doesn't
practice	remembering	Kṛṣṇa	while	he	is	struggling	for	existence,	then	it	will
not	be	possible	for	him	to	remember	Kṛṣṇa	at	the	time	of	death.	Lord	Caitanya
also	advises	this.	He	says	that	one	should	practice	remembering	the	Lord	by
chanting	the	names	of	the	Lord	always.	The	names	of	the	Lord	and	the	Lord
are	nondifferent.	So	Lord	Kṛṣṇa's	instruction	to	Arjuna	to	"remember	Me"	and
Lord	Caitanya's	injunction	to	always	"chant	the	names	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa"	are	the
same	instruction.	There	is	no	difference,	because	Kṛṣṇa	and	Kṛṣṇa's	name	are
nondifferent.	In	the	absolute	status	there	is	no	difference	between	reference
and	referent.	Therefore	we	have	to	practice	remembering	the	Lord	always,
twenty-four	hours	a	day,	by	chanting	His	names	and	molding	our	life's
activities	in	such	a	way	that	we	can	remember	Him	always.
How	is	this	possible?	The	
ācāryas	
give	the	following	example.	If	a	married
woman	is	attached	to	another	man,	or	if	a	man	has	an	attachment	for	a	woman
other	than	his	wife,	then	the	attachment	is	to	be	considered	very	strong.	One
with	such	an	attachment	is	always	thinking	of	the	loved	one.	The	wife	who	is
thinking	of	her	lover	is	always	thinking	of	meeting	him,	even	while	she	is
carrying	out	her	household	chores.	In	fact,	she	carries	out	her	household	work
even	more	carefully	so	her	husband	will	not	suspect	her	attachment.	Similarly,
we	should	always	remember	the	supreme	lover,	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa,	and	at	the	same
time	perform	our	material	duties	very	nicely.	A	strong	sense	of	love	is	required
here.	If	we	have	a	strong	sense	of	love	for	the	Supreme	Lord,	then	we	can
discharge	our	duty	and	at	the	same	time	remember	Him.	But	we	have	to
develop	that	sense	of	love.	Arjuna,	for	instance,	was	always	thinking	of	Kṛṣṇa;
he	was	the	constant	companion	of	Kṛṣṇa,	and	at	the	same	time	he	was	a
warrior.	Kṛṣṇa	did	not	advise	him	to	give	up	fighting	and	go	to	the	forest	to
meditate.	When	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	delineates	the	
yoga	
system	to	Arjuna,	Arjuna	says
that	the	practice	of	this	system	is	not	possible	for	him.
arjuna	uvācayo	'yaṁ	yogas	tvayā	proktaḥ	sāmyena	madhusūdana
etasyāhaṁ	na	paśyāmi	cañcalatvāt	sthitiṁ	sthirām
"Arjuna	said,	O	Madhusūdana,	the	system	of	
yoga	
which	you	have
summarized	appears	impractical	and	unendurable	to	me,	for	the	mind	is
restless	and	unsteady."	(Bg.	6.33)
But	the	Lord	says:
yoginām	api	sarveṣāṁ	mad-gatenāntarātmanā
śraddhāvān	bhajate	yo	māṁ	sa	me	yuktatamo	mataḥ
"Of	all	
yogīs,	
he	who	always	abides	in	Me	with	great	faith,	worshiping	Me	in
transcendental	loving	service,	is	most	intimately	united	with	Me	in	
yoga,	
and
is	the	highest	of	all."	(Bg.	6.47)	So	one	who	thinks	of	the	Supreme	Lord
always	is	the	greatest	
yogī,	
the	supermost	
jñānī,	
and	the	greatest	devotee	at	the
same	time.	The	Lord	further	tells	Arjuna	that	as	a	
kṣatriya	
he	cannot	give	up
his	fighting,	but	if	Arjuna	fights	remembering	Kṛṣṇa,	then	he	will	be	able	to
remember	Him	at	the	time	of	death.	But	one	must	be	completely	surrendered
in	the	transcendental	loving	service	of	the	Lord.
We	work	not	with	our	body,	actually,	but	with	our	mind	and	intelligence.	So
if	the	intelligence	and	the	mind	are	always	engaged	in	the	thought	of	the
Supreme	Lord,	then	naturally	the	senses	are	also	engaged	in	His	service.
Superficially,	at	least,	the	activities	of	the	senses	remain	the	same,	but	the
consciousness	is	changed.	The	
Bhagavad-gītā	
teaches	one	how	to	absorb	the
mind	and	intelligence	in	the	thought	of	the	Lord.	Such	absorption	will	enable
one	to	transfer	himself	to	the	kingdom	of	the	Lord.	If	the	mind	is	engaged	in
Kṛṣṇa's	service,	then	the	senses	are	automatically	engaged	in	His	service.	This
is	the	art,	and	this	is	also	the	secret	of	
Bhagavad-gītā:	
total	absorption	in	the
thought	of	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.
Modern	man	has	struggled	very	hard	to	reach	the	moon,	but	he	has	not	tried
very	hard	to	elevate	himself	spiritually.	If	one	has	fifty	years	of	life	ahead	of
him,	he	should	engage	that	brief	time	in	cultivating	this	practice	of
remembering	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	This	practice	is	the
devotional	process	of:
śravaṇaṁ	kīrtanaṁ	viṣṇoḥ	smaraṇaṁ	pāda-sevanam
arcanaṁ	vandanaṁ	dāsyaṁ	sakhyam	ātma-nivedanamThese	nine	processes,	of	which	the	easiest	is	
śravaṇaṁ,	
hearing	
Bhagavad-
gītā	
from	the	realized	person,	will	turn	one	to	the	thought	of	the	Supreme
Being.	This	will	lead	to	
niścala,	
remembering	the	Supreme	Lord,	and	will
enable	one,	upon	leaving	the	body,	to	attain	a	spiritual	body	which	is	just	fit
for	association	with	the	Supreme	Lord.
The	Lord	further	says:
abhyāsa-yoga-yuktena	cetasā	nānya-gāminā
paramaṁ	puruṣaṁ	divyaṁ	yāti	pārthānucintayan
"By	practicing	this	remembering,	without	being	deviated,	thinking	ever	of	the
Supreme	Godhead,	one	is	sure	to	achieve	the	planet	of	the	Divine,	the
Supreme	Personality,	O	son	of	Kuntī."	(Bg.	8.8)
This	is	not	a	very	difficult	process.	However,	one	must	learn	it	from	an
experienced	person,	from	one	who	is	already	in	the	practice.	The	mind	is
always	flying	to	this	and	that,	but	one	must	always	practice	concentrating	the
mind	on	the	form	of	the	Supreme	Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	or	on	the	sound	of	His	name.
The	mind	is	naturally	restless,	going	hither	and	thither,	but	it	can	rest	in	the
sound	vibration	of	Kṛṣṇa.	One	must	thus	meditate	on	
paramaṁ	puruṣaṁ,	
the
Supreme	Person;	and	thus	attain	Him.	The	ways	and	the	means	for	ultimate
realization,	ultimate	attainment,	are	stated	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
and	the	doors
of	this	knowledge	are	open	for	everyone.	No	one	is	barred	out.	All	classes	of
men	can	approach	the	Lord	by	thinking	of	Him,	for	hearing	and	thinking	of
Him	is	possible	for	everyone.
The	Lord	further	says:
māṁ	hi	pārtha	vyapāśritya	ye	'pi	syuḥ	pāpa-yonayaḥ
striyo	vaiśyās	tathā	śūdrās	te	'pi	yānti	parāṁ	gatim
kiṁ	punar	brāhmaṇāḥ	puṇyā	bhaktā	rājarṣayas	tathā
anityam	asukhaṁ	lokam	imaṁ	prāpya	bhajasva	mām
"O	son	of	Pṛthā,	anyone	who	will	take	shelter	in	Me,	whether	a	woman,	or	a
merchant,	or	one	born	in	a	low	family,	can	yet	approach	the	supreme
destination.	How	much	greater	then	are	the	
brāhmaṇas,	
the	righteous,	the
devotees,	and	saintly	kings!	In	this	miserable	world,	these	are	fixed	in
devotional	service	to	the	Lord."	(Bg.	9.32-33)
Human	beings	even	in	the	lower	statuses	of	life	(a	merchant,	a	woman	or	alaborer)	can	attain	the	Supreme.	One	does	not	need	highly	developed
intelligence.	The	point	is	that	anyone	who	accepts	the	principle	of	
bhakti-
yoga	
and	accepts	the	Supreme	Lord	as	the	
summum	bonum	
of	life,	as	the
highest	target,	the	ultimate	goal,	can	approach	the	Lord	in	the	spiritual	sky.	If
one	adopts	the	principles	enunciated	in	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
he	can	make	his	life
perfect	and	make	a	perfect	solution	to	all	the	problems	of	life	which	arise	out
of	the	transient	nature	of	material	existence.	This	is	the	sum	and	substance	of
the	entire	
Bhagavad-gītā.
In	conclusion,	
Bhagavad-gīta	
is	a	transcendental	literature	which	one
should	read	very	carefully.	It	is	capable	of	saving	one	from	all	fear.
nehābhikrama-nāśo	'sti	pratyavāyo	na	vidyate
svalpam	apy	asya	dharmasya	trāyate	mahato	bhayāt
"In	this	endeavor	there	is	no	loss	or	diminution,	and	a	little	advancement	on
this	path	can	protect	one	from	the	most	dangerous	type	of	fear."	(Bg.	2.40)	If
one	reads	
Bhagavad-gītā	
sincerely	and	seriously,	then	all	of	the	reactions	of
his	past	misdeeds	will	not	react	upon	him.	In	the	last	portion	of	
Bhagavad-
gītā,	
Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	proclaims:
sarva-dharmān	parityajya	mām	ekaṁ	śaraṇaṁ	vraja
ahaṁ	tvāṁ	sarva-pāpebhyo	mokṣayiṣyāmi	mā	śucaḥ
"Give	up	all	varieties	of	religiousness,	and	just	surrender	unto	Me;	and	in
return	I	shall	protect	you	from	all	sinful	reactions.	Therefore,	you	have
nothing	to	fear."	(Bg.	18.66)	Thus	the	Lord	takes	all	responsibility	for	one
who	surrenders	unto	Him,	and	He	indemnifies	all	the	reactions	of	sin.
One	cleanses	himself	daily	by	taking	a	bath	in	water,	but	one	who	takes	his
bath	only	once	in	the	sacred	Ganges	water	of	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
cleanses
away	all	the	dirt	of	material	life.	Because	
Bhagavad-gītā
	is	spoken	by	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	one	need	not	read	any	other	Vedic	literature.
One	need	only	attentively	and	regularly	hear	and	read	
Bhagavad-	gītā.	
In	the
present	age,	mankind	is	so	absorbed	with	mundane	activities	that	it	is	not
possible	to	read	all	of	the	Vedic	literatures.	But	this	is	not	necessary.	This	one
book,	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
will	suffice	because	it	is	the	essence	of	all	Vedic
literatures	and	because	it	is	spoken	by	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	It
is	said	that	one	who	drinks	the	water	of	the	Ganges	certainly	gets	salvation,
but	what	to	speak	of	one	who	drinks	the	waters	of	
Bhagavad-gītā?	Gītā
	is	thevery	nectar	of	the
	Mahābhārata	
spoken	by	Viṣṇu	Himself,	for	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is
the	original	Viṣṇu.	It	is	nectar	emanating	from	the	mouth	of	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	and	the	Ganges	is	said	to	be	emanating	from	the	lotus
feet	of	the	Lord.	Of	course	there	is	no	difference	between	the	mouth	and	the
feet	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	but	in	our	position	we	can	appreciate	that	the
Bhagavad-gītā
	is	even	more	important	than	the	Ganges.
The	
Bhagavad-gītā
	is	just	like	a	cow,	and	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	who	is	a	cowherd
boy,	is	milking	this	cow.	The	milk	is	the	essence	of	the	
Vedas,	
and	Arjuna	is
just	like	a	calf.	The	wise	men,	the	great	sages	and	pure	devotees,	are	to	drink
the	nectarean	milk	of	
Bhagavad-gītā.
In	this	present	day,	man	is	very	eager	to	have	one	scripture,	one	God,	one
religion,	and	one	occupation.	So	let	there	be	one	common	scripture	for	the
whole	world—
Bhagavad-gītā.	
And	let	there	be	one	God	only	for	the	whole
world—Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.	And	one	
mantra
	only—Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa
Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/	Hare	Rāma,	Hare	Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,	Hare	Hare.	And	let
there	be	one	work	only—the	service	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.The	Disciplic	Succession
THE	DISCIPLIC	SUCCESSION
Evaṁ	paramparā-prāptam	imaṁ	rājarṣayo	viduḥ.
	(
Bhagavad-gītā,	
4.2)
This	
Bhagavad-gītā	As	It	Is
	is	received	through	this	disciplic	succession:
1)	Kṛṣṇa,
	2)	Brahmā,	3)	Nārada,	4)	Vyāsa,	5)	Madhva,	6)	Padmanābha,	7)
Nṛhari,	8)	Mādhava,	9)	Akṣobhya,	10)	Jaya	Tīrtha,	11)	Jñānasindhu,	12)
Dayānidhi,	13)	Vidyānidhi,	14)	Rājendra,	15)	Jayadharma,	16)	Puruṣottama,
17)	Brahmaṇya	Tīrtha,	18)	Vyāsa	Tīrtha,	19)	Lakṣmīpati,	20)	Mādhavendra
Purī,	21)	Īśvara	Purī,	(Nityānanda,	Advaita),	
22)	Lord	Caitanya,
	23)	Rūpa,
(Svarūpa,	Sanātana),	24)	Raghunātha,	Jīva,	25)	Kṛṣṇadāsa,	26)	Narottama,	27)
Viśvanātha,	28)	(Baladeva)	Jagannātha,	29)	Bhaktivinoda,	30)	Gaurakiśora,
31)	Bhaktisiddhānta	Sarasvatī,	32)	Bhaktivedanta	Swami	Prabhupāda.Chapter-1
CHAPTER	ONE
Observing	the	Armies	on	the
Battlefield	of	Kurukṣetra
TEXT	1
ध ृ त र ा ᇾ ट ् र
	
उ व ा च
	
।
ध म ᆼ ᇤ े त ् र े
	
क ु ኄ ᇤ े त ् र े
	
स म व े त ा
	
य ु य ु ᇰ स व ः
	
।
म ा म क ा ः
	
प ा ᇯ ड व ा ᇽ च ै व
	
ि क म क ु व ᆼ त
	
स ᇮ ज य
	
॥
१
॥
dhṛtarāṣṭra	uvāca
dharma-kṣetre	kuru-kṣetresamavetā	yuyutsavaḥ
māmakāḥ	pāṇḍavāś	caiva
kim	akurvata	sañjaya
dhṛtarāṣṭraḥ
—King	Dhṛtarāṣṭra;	
uvāca
—said;	
dharma-kṣetre
—in	the	place
of	pilgrimage;	
kuru-kṣetre
—in	the	place	named	Kurukṣetra;	
samavetāḥ
—
assembled;	
yuyutsavaḥ
—desiring	to	fight;	
māmakāḥ
—my	party	(sons);
pāṇḍavāḥ
—the	sons	of	Pāṇḍu;	
ca
—and;	eva-certainly;	
kim
—what;	
akurvata
—	did	they	do;	
sañjaya
—O	Sañjaya.
TRANSLATION
Dhṛtarāṣṭra	said:	O	Sañjaya,	after	assembling	in	the	place	of
pilgrimage	at	Kurukṣetra,	what	did	my	sons	and	the	sons	of	Pāṇḍu	do,
being	desirous	to	fight?
PURPORT
Bhagavad-gītā
	is	the	widely	read	theistic	science	summarized	in	the	
Gītā-
māhātmya	(Glorification	of	the	Gītā).	
There	it	says	that	one	should	read
Bhagavad-gītā	
very	scrutinizingly	with	the	help	of	a	person	who	is	a	devotee
of	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	and	try	to	understand	it	without	personally	motivated
interpretations.	The	example	of	clear	understanding	is	there	in	the	
Bhagavad-
gītā	
itself,	in	the	way	the	teaching	is	understood	by	Arjuna,	who	heard	the
Gītā	
directly	from	the	Lord.	If	someone	is	fortunate	enough	to	understand
Bhagavad-gītā	
in	that	line	of	disciplic	succession,	without	motivated
interpretation,	then	he	surpasses	all	studies	of	Vedic	wisdom,	and	all	scriptures
of	the	world.	One	will	find	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
all	that	is	contained	in	other
scriptures,	but	the	reader	will	also	find	things	which	are	not	to	be	found
elsewhere.	That	is	the	specific	standard	of	the	
Gītā
.	It	is	the	perfect	theistic
science	because	it	is	directly	spoken	by	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.
The	topics	discussed	by	Dhṛtarāṣṭra	and	Sañjaya,	as	described	in	the
Mahābhārata,	
form	the	basic	principle	for	this	great	philosophy.	It	is
understood	that	this	philosophy	evolved	on	the	Battlefield	of	Kurukṣetra,
which	is	a	sacred	place	of	pilgrimage	from	the	immemorial	time	of	the	Vedic
age.	It	was	spoken	by	the	Lord	when	He	was	present	personally	on	this	planetfor	the	guidance	of	mankind.
The	word	
dharma-kṣetra	
(a	place	where	religious	rituals	are	performed)	is
significant	because,	on	the	Battlefield	of	Kurukṣetra,	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead	was	present	on	the	side	of	Arjuna.	Dhṛtarāṣṭra,	the	father	of	the
Kurus,	was	highly	doubtful	about	the	possibility	of	his	sons'	ultimate	victory.
In	his	doubt,	he	inquired	from	his	secretary	Sañjaya,	"What	did	my	sons	and
the	sons	of	Pāṇḍu	do?"	He	was	confident	that	both	his	sons	and	the	sons	of	his
younger	brother	Pāṇḍu	were	assembled	in	that	Field	of	Kurukṣetra	for	a
determined	engagement	of	the	war.	Still,	his	inquiry	is	significant.	He	did	not
want	a	compromise	between	the	cousins	and	brothers,	and	he	wanted	to	be
sure	of	the	fate	of	his	sons	on	the	battlefield.	Because	the	battle	was	arranged
to	be	fought	at	Kurukṣetra,	which	is	mentioned	elsewhere	in	the	
Vedas	
as	a
place	of	worship—even	for	the	denizens	of	heaven—Dhṛtarāṣṭra	became	very
fearful	about	the	influence	of	the	holy	place	on	the	outcome	of	the	battle.	He
knew	very	well	that	this	would	influence	Arjuna	and	the	sons	of	Pāṇḍu
favorably,	because	by	nature	they	were	all	virtuous.	Sañjaya	was	a	student	of
Vyāsa,	and	therefore,	by	the	mercy	of	Vyāsa,	Sañjaya	was	able	to	envision	the
Battlefield	of	Kurukṣetra	even	while	he	was	in	the	room	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra.	And
so,	Dhṛtarāṣṭra	asked	him	about	the	situation	on	the	battlefield.
Both	the	Pāṇḍavas	and	the	sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra	belong	to	the	same	family,
but	Dhṛtarāṣṭra's	mind	is	disclosed	herein.	He	deliberately	claimed	only	his
sons	as	Kurus,	and	he	separated	the	sons	of	Pāṇḍu	from	the	family	heritage.
One	can	thus	understand	the	specific	position	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra	in	his	relationship
with	his	nephews,	the	sons	of	Pāṇḍu.	As	in	the	paddy	field	the	unnecessary
plants	are	taken	out,	so	it	is	expected	from	the	very	beginning	of	these	topics
that	in	the	religious	field	of	Kurukṣetra	where	the	father	of	religion,	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa,
was	present,	the	unwanted	plants	like	Dhṛtarāṣṭra's	son	Duryodhana	and	others
would	be	wiped	out	and	the	thoroughly	religious	persons,	headed	by
Yudhiṣṭhira,	would	be	established	by	the	Lord.	This	is	the	significance	of	the
words	
dharma-kṣetre	
and	
kuru-	kṣetre,	
apart	from	their	historical	and	Vedic
importance.
TEXT	2
स ᇮ ज य
	
उ व ा च
	
।
द ृ ᇾ ट ् व ा
	
त ु
	
प ा ᇯ ड व ा न ी क ं
	
ᇼ य ू ढ ं
	
द ु य ो ᆼ ध न ᇿ त द ा
	
।
आ च ा य ᆼ म ु प स ं ग ᇸ य
	
र ा ज ा
	
व च न म ब ् र व ी त ्
	
॥
२
॥sañjaya	uvāca
dṛṣṭvā	tu	pāṇḍavānīkaṁ
vyūḍhaṁ	duryodhanas	tadā
ācāryam	upasaṅgamya
rājā	vacanam	abravīt
sañjayaḥ—
Sañjaya;	
uvāca—
said;	
dṛṣṭvā—
after	seeing;	
tu—
but;	
pāṇḍava-
anīkam—
the	soldiers	of	the	Pāṇḍavas;	
vyūḍham—
arranged	in	military
phalanx;	
duryodhanaḥ—
King	Duryodhana;	
tadā—
at	that	time;	
ācāryam—	
the
teacher;	
upasaṅgamya—
approaching	nearby;	
rājā—
the	king;	
vacanam—
words;	
abravīt—
spoke.
TRANSLATION
Sañjaya	said:	O	King,	after	looking	over	the	army	gathered	by	the	sons
of	Pāṇḍu,	King	Duryodhana	went	to	his	teacher	and	began	to	speak	the
following	words:
PURPORT
Dhṛtarāṣṭra	was	blind	from	birth.	Unfortunately,	he	was	also	bereft	of
spiritual	vision.	He	knew	very	well	that	his	sons	were	equally	blind	in	the
matter	of	religion,	and	he	was	sure	that	they	could	never	reach	an
understanding	with	the	Pāṇḍavas,	who	were	all	pious	since	birth.	Still	he	was
doubtful	about	the	influence	of	the	place	of	pilgrimage,	and	Sañjaya	could
understand	his	motive	in	asking	about	the	situation	on	the	battlefield.	He
wanted,	therefore,	to	encourage	the	despondent	King,	and	thus	he	warned	him
that	his	sons	were	not	going	to	make	any	sort	of	compromise	under	the
influence	of	the	holy	place.	Sañjaya	therefore	informed	the	King	that	his	son,
Duryodhana,	after	seeing	the	military	force	of	the	Pāṇḍavas,	at	once	went	to
the	commander-in-chief,	Droṇācārya,	to	inform	him	of	the	real	position.
Although	Duryodhana	is	mentioned	as	the	king,	he	still	had	to	go	to	the
commander	on	account	of	the	seriousness	of	the	situation.	He	was	therefore
quite	fit	to	be	a	politician.	But	Duryodhana's	diplomatic	veneer	could	not
disguise	the	fear	he	felt	when	he	saw	the	military	arrangement	of	the
Pāṇḍavas.TEXT	3
प ᇽ य ै त ा ं
	
प ा ᇯ ड ु प ु त ् र ा ण ा म ा च ा य ᆼ
	
म ह त ी ं
	
च म ू म ्
	
।
ᇼ य ू ढ ा ं
	
द ् ኄ प द प ु त ् र े ण
	
त व
	
ि श ᇾ य े ण
	
ध ी म त ा
	
॥
३
॥
paśyaitāṁ	pāṇḍu-putrāṇām
ācārya	mahatīṁ	camūm
vyūḍhāṁ	drupada-putreṇa
tava	śiṣyeṇa	dhīmatā
paśya—
behold;	
etām—
this;	
pāṇḍu-putrāṇām—
of	the	sons	of	Pāṇḍu;	
ācārya
—
O	teacher;	
mahatīm—
great;	
camūm—
military	force;	
vyūḍhām—
arranged;
drupada-putreṇa—
by	the	son	of	Drupada;	
tava—
your;	
śiṣyeṇa—	
disciple;
dhīmatā—
very	intelligent.
TRANSLATION
O	my	teacher,	behold	the	great	army	of	the	sons	of	Pāṇḍu,	so	expertly
arranged	by	your	intelligent	disciple,	the	son	of	Drupada.
PURPORT
Duryodhana,	a	great	diplomat,	wanted	to	point	out	the	defects	of
Droṇācārya,	the	great	
brāhmaṇa	
commander-in-chief.	Droṇācārya	had	some
political	quarrel	with	King	Drupada,	the	father	of	Draupadī,	who	was	Arjuna's
wife.	As	a	result	of	this	quarrel,	Drupada	performed	a	great	sacrifice,	by
which	he	received	the	benediction	of	having	a	son	who	would	be	able	to	kill
Droṇācārya.	Droṇācārya	knew	this	perfectly	well,	and	yet,	as	a	liberal
brāhmaṇa,	
he	did	not	hesitate	to	impart	all	his	military	secrets	when	the	son	of
Drupada,	Dhṛṣṭadyumna,	was	entrusted	to	him	for	military	education.	Now,	on
the	Battlefield	of	Kurukṣetra,	Dhṛṣṭadyumna	took	the	side	of	the	Pāṇḍavas,
and	it	was	he	who	arranged	for	their	military	phalanx,	after	having	learned	the
art	from	Droṇācārya.	Duryodhana	pointed	out	this	mistake	of	Droṇācārya's	so
that	he	might	be	alert	and	uncompromising	in	the	fighting.	By	this	he	wanted
to	point	out	also	that	he	should	not	be	similarly	lenient	in	battle	against	the
Pāṇḍavas,	who	were	also	Droṇācārya's	affectionate	students.	Arjuna,especially,	was	his	most	affectionate	and	brilliant	student.	Duryodhana	also
warned	that	such	leniency	in	the	fight	would	lead	to	defeat.
TEXT	4
अ त ् र
	
श ू र ा
	
म ह े ᇾ व ा स ा
	
भ ी म ा ज ु ᆼ न स म ा
	
य ु ि ध
	
।
य ु य ु ध ा न ो
	
ि व र ा ट ᇽ च
	
द ् ኄ प द ᇽ च
	
म ह ा र थ ः
	
॥
४
॥
atra	śūrā	maheṣvāsā
bhīmārjuna-samā	yudhi
yuyudhāno	virāṭaś	ca
drupadaś	ca	mahā-rathaḥ
atra—
here;	
śūrāḥ—
heroes;	
maheṣvāsāḥ—
mighty	bowmen;	
bhīma-arjuna—
Bhīma	and	Arjuna;	
samāḥ—
equal;	
yudhi—
in	the	fight;	
yuyudhānaḥ—
Yuyudhāna;	
virāṭaḥ—
Virāṭa;	
ca—
also;	
drupadaḥ—
Drupada;	
ca—
also;
mahārathaḥ—
great	fighter.
TRANSLATION
Here	in	this	army	there	are	many	heroic	bowmen	equal	in	fighting	to
Bhīma	and	Arjuna;	there	are	also	great	fighters	like	Yuyudhāna,	Virāṭa
and	Drupada.
PURPORT
Even	though	Dhṛṣṭadyumna	was	not	a	very	important	obstacle	in	the	face	of
Droṇācārya's	very	great	power	in	the	military	art,	there	were	many	others	who
were	the	cause	of	fear.	They	are	mentioned	by	Duryodhana	as	great	stumbling
blocks	on	the	path	of	victory	because	each	and	every	one	of	them	was	as
formidable	as	Bhīma	and	Arjuna.	He	knew	the	strength	of	Bhīma	and	Arjuna,
and	thus	he	compared	the	others	with	them.
TEXT	5
ध ृ ᇾ ट क े त ु ᇽ च े ि क त ा न ः
	
क ा ि श र ा ज ᇽ च
	
व ी य ᆼ व ा न ्
	
।प ु ኄ ि ज ᇰ क ु ि ᇳ त भ ो ज ᇽ च
	
श ै ᇶ य ᇽ च
	
न र प ु ं ग व ः
	
॥
५
॥
dhṛṣṭaketuś	cekitānaḥ
kāśirājaś	ca	vīryavān
purujit	kuntibhojaś	ca
śaibyaś	ca	nara-puṅgavaḥ
dhṛṣṭaketuḥ—
Dhṛṣṭaketu;	
cekitānaḥ
—Cekitāna;	
kāśirājaḥ—
Kaśirāja;	
ca—
also;
	vīryavān—
very	powerful;	
purujit—
Purujit;	
kuntibhojaḥ—
Kuntibhoja;	
ca
—
and;	
śaibyaḥ—
Śaibya;	
ca—
and;	
nara-puṅgavaḥ—
heroes	in	human	society.
TRANSLATION
There	are	also	great,	heroic,	powerful	fighters	like	Dhṛṣṭaketu,
Cekitāna,	Kāśirāja,	Purujit,	Kuntibhoja	and	Śaibya.
TEXT	6
य ु ध ा म ᇳ य ु ᇽ च
	
ि व क ् र ा ᇳ त
	
उ ሧ म ौ ज ा ᇽ च
	
व ी य ᆼ व ा न ्
	
।
स ौ भ द ् र ो
	
द ् र ौ प द े य ा ᇽ च
	
स व ᆼ
	
ए व
	
म ह ा र थ ा ः
	
॥
६
॥
yudhāmanyuś	ca	vikrānta
uttamaujāś	ca	vīryavān
saubhadro	draupadeyāś	ca
sarva	eva	mahā-rathāḥ
yudhāmanyuḥ—
Yudhāmanyu;	
ca—
and;	
vikrāntaḥ—
mighty;	
uttamaujāḥ	
—
Uttamaujā;	
ca—
and;	
vīryavān—
very	powerful;	
saubhadraḥ—
the	son	of
Subhadrā;	
draupadeyāḥ—
the	sons	of	Draupadī;	
ca—
and;	
sarve—
all;	
eva—
certainly;	
mahā-rathāḥ—
great	chariot	fighters.
TRANSLATION
There	are	the	mighty	Yudhāmanyu,	the	very	powerful	Uttamaujā,	the
son	of	Subhadrā	and	the	sons	of	Draupadī.	All	these	warriors	are	great
chariot	fighters.TEXT	7
अ ᇿ म ा क ं
	
त ु
	
ि व ि श ᇾ ट ा
	
य े
	
त ा ि ᇳ न ब ो ध
	
द ् ि व ज ो ሧ म
	
।
न ा य क ा
	
म म
	
स ै ᇳ य ᇿ य
	
स ं ᇥ ा थ ᆾ
	
त ा ᇳ ब ् र व ी ि म
	
त े
	
॥
७
॥
asmākaṁ	tu	viśiṣṭā	ye
tān	nibodha	dvijottama
nāyakā	mama	sainyasya
saṁjñārthaṁ	tān	bravīmi	te
asmākam—
our;	
tu—
but;	
viśiṣṭāḥ
—especially	powerful;	
ye—
those;	
tān—
them;	
nibodha—
just	take	note,	be	informed;	
dvijottama—
the	best	of	the
brāhmaṇas;	nāyakāḥ—
captains;	
mama—
my;	
sainyasya—
of	the	soldiers;
saṁjñā-artham—
for	information;	
tān—
them;	
bravīmi—
I	am	speaking;	
te—
your.
TRANSLATION
O	best	of	the	brāhmaṇas,	for	your	information,	let	me	tell	you	about
the	captains	who	are	especially	qualified	to	lead	my	military	force.
TEXT	8
भ व ा ᇳ भ ी ᇾ म ᇽ च
	
क ण ᆼ ᇽ च
	
क ृ प ᇽ च
	
स ि म ि त ᇮ ज य ः
	
।
अ ᇽ व ᇰ थ ा म ा
	
ि व क ण ᆼ ᇽ च
	
स ौ म द ि ሧ ᇿ त थ ै व
	
च
	
॥
८
॥
bhavān	bhīṣmaś	ca	karṇaś	ca
kṛpaś	ca	samitiñjayaḥ
aśvatthāmā	vikarṇaś	ca
saumadattis	tathaiva	ca
bhavān—
yourself;
	bhīṣmaḥ—
Grandfather	Bhīṣma;
	ca—
also;
	karṇaḥ—
Karṇa;
	ca—
and;
	kṛpaḥ—
Kṛpa;
	ca—
and;
	samitiñjayaḥ
—always	victorious	in
battle;
	aśvatthāmā—
Aśvatthāmā;
	vikarṇaḥ—
Vikarṇa;
	ca—
as	well	as;
saumadattiḥ—
the	son	of	Somadatta;
	tathā—
and	as;
	eva—
certainly;
	ca—
and.TRANSLATION
There	are	personalities	like	yourself,	Bhīṣma,	Karṇa,	Kṛpa,
Aśvatthāmā,	Vikarṇa	and	the	son	of	Somadatta	called	Bhuriśravā,	who
are	always	victorious	in	battle.
PURPORT
Duryodhana	mentioned	the	exceptional	heroes	in	the	battle,	all	of	whom	are
ever-victorious.	Vikarṇa	is	the	brother	of	Duryodhana,	Aśvatthāmā	is	the	son
of	Droṇācārya,	and	Saumadatti,	or	Bhūriśravā,	is	the	son	of	the	King	of	the
Bāhlīkas.	Karṇa	is	the	half	brother	of	Arjuna,	as	he	was	born	of	Kuntī	before
her	marriage	with	King	Pāṇḍu.	Kṛpācārya	married	the	twin	sister	of
Droṇācārya.
TEXT	9
अ ᇳ य े
	
च
	
ब ह व ः
	
श ू र ा
	
म द थ ᆹ
	
ᇰ य ᇧ त ज ी ि व त ा ः
	
।
न ा न ा श ᇿ त ् र प ् र ह र ण ा ः
	
स व ᆹ
	
य ु ሬ ि व श ा र द ा ः
	
॥
९
॥
anye	ca	bahavaḥ	śūrā
mad-arthe	tyakta-jīvitāḥ
nānā-śastra-praharaṇāḥ
sarve	yuddha-viśāradāḥ
anye—
many	others;	
ca—
also;	
bahavaḥ—
in	great	numbers;	śūrāḥ-heroes;
mad-arthe-for	my	sake;	
tyakta-jīvitāḥ—
prepared	to	risk	life;	
nānā—
many;
śastra-weapons;	
praharaṇāḥ—
equipped	with;	
sarve—
all	of	them;
	yuddha—
battle;	
viśāradāḥ—
experienced	in	military	science.
TRANSLATION
There	are	many	other	heroes	who	are	prepared	to	lay	down	their	lives
for	my	sake.	All	of	them	are	well	equipped	with	different	kinds	of
weapons,	and	all	are	experienced	in	military	science.PURPORT
As	far	as	the	others	are	concerned–like	Jayadratha,	Kṛtavarmā,	Śalya,	etc.–
all	are	determined	to	lay	down	their	lives	for	Duryodhana's	sake.	In	other
words,	it	is	already	concluded	that	all	of	them	would	die	in	the	Battle	of
Kurukṣetra	for	joining	the	party	of	the	sinful	Duryodhana.	Duryodhana	was,
of	course,	confident	of	his	victory	on	account	of	the	above-mentioned
combined	strength	of	his	friends.
TEXT	10
अ प य ा ᆼ ᇴ त ं
	
त द ᇿ म ा क ं
	
ब ल ं
	
भ ी ᇾ म ा ि भ र ि ᇤ त म ्
	
।
प य ा ᆼ ᇴ त ं
	
ि ᇰ व द म े त े ष ा ं
	
ब ल ं
	
भ ी म ा ि भ र ि ᇤ त म ्
	
॥
१ ०
॥
aparyāptaṁ	tad	asmākaṁ
balaṁ	bhīṣmābhirakṣitam
paryāptaṁ	tv	idam	eteṣāṁ
balaṁ	bhīmābhirakṣitam
aparyāptam—
immeasurable;	
tat—
that;	
asmākam—
of	ours;	
balam—
strength;	
bhīṣma—
by	Grandfather	Bhīṣma;	
abhirakṣitam—
perfectly	protected;
paryāptam—
limited;	
tu—
but;	
idam—
all	these;	
eteṣām—
of	the	Pāṇḍavas;
balam—
strength;	
bhīma—
by	Bhīma;	
abhirakṣitam—
carefully	protected.
TRANSLATION
Our	strength	is	immeasurable,	and	we	are	perfectly	protected	by
Grandfather	Bhīṣma,	whereas	the	strength	of	the	Pāṇḍavas,	carefully
protected	by	Bhīma,	is	limited.
PURPORT
Herein	an	estimation	of	comparative	strength	is	made	by	Duryodhana.	He
thinks	that	the	strength	of	his	armed	forces	is	immeasurable,	being	specifically
protected	by	the	most	experienced	general,	Grandfather	Bhīṣma.	On	the	otherhand,	the	forces	of	the	Pāṇḍavas	are	limited,	being	protected	by	a	less
experienced	general,	Bhīma,	who	is	like	a	fig	in	the	presence	of	Bhīṣma.
Duryodhana	was	always	envious	of	Bhīma	because	he	knew	perfectly	well
that	if	he	should	die	at	all,	he	would	only	be	killed	by	Bhīma.	But	at	the	same
time,	he	was	confident	of	his	victory	on	account	of	the	presence	of	Bhīṣma,
who	was	a	far	superior	general.	His	conclusion	that	he	would	come	out	of	the
battle	victorious	was	well	ascertained.
TEXT	11
अ य न े ष ु
	
च
	
स व ᆹ ष ु
	
य थ ा भ ा ग म व ि ᇿ थ त ा ः
	
।
भ ी ᇾ म म े व ा ि भ र ᇤ ᇳ त ु
	
भ व ᇳ त ः
	
स व ᆼ
	
ए व
	
ि ह
	
॥
१ १
॥
ayaneṣu	ca	sarveṣu
yathā-bhāgam	avasthitāḥ
bhīṣmam	evābhirakṣantu
bhavantaḥ	sarva	eva	hi
ayaneṣu—
in	the	strategic	points;	
ca—
also;	
sarveṣu—
everywhere;
yathābhāgam—
as	they	are	differently	arranged;	
avasthitāḥ—
situated;
bhīṣmam—	
unto	Grandfather	Bhīṣma;	
eva—
certainly;	
abhirakṣantu—
support
may	be	given;	
bhavantaḥ—
all	of	you;	
sarve—
respectively;	
eva—
certainly;	
hi
—
and	exactly.
TRANSLATION
Now	all	of	you	must	give	full	support	to	Grandfather	Bhīṣma,	standing
at	your	respective	strategic	points	in	the	phalanx	of	the	army.
PURPORT
Duryodhana,	after	praising	the	prowess	of	Bhīṣma,	further	considered	that
others	might	think	that	they	had	been	considered	less	important,	so	in	his
usual	diplomatic	way,	he	tried	to	adjust	the	situation	in	the	above	words.	He
emphasized	that	Bhīṣmadeva	was	undoubtedly	the	greatest	hero,	but	he	was
an	old	man,	so	everyone	must	especially	think	of	his	protection	from	all	sides.He	might	become	engaged	in	the	fight,	and	the	enemy	might	take	advantage
of	his	full	engagement	on	one	side.	Therefore,	it	was	important	that	other
heroes	would	not	leave	their	strategic	positions	and	allow	the	enemy	to	break
the	phalanx.	Duryodhana	clearly	felt	that	the	victory	of	the	Kurus	depended	on
the	presence	of	Bhīṣmadeva.	He	was	confident	of	the	full	support	of
Bhīṣmadeva	and	Droṇācārya	in	the	battle	because	he	well	knew	that	they	did
not	even	speak	a	word	when	Arjuna's	wife	Draupadī,	in	her	helpless	condition,
had	appealed	to	them	for	justice	while	she	was	being	forced	to	strip	naked	in
the	presence	of	all	the	great	generals	in	the	assembly.	Although	he	knew	that
the	two	generals	had	some	sort	of	affection	for	the	Pāṇḍavas,	he	hoped	that	all
such	affection	would	now	be	completely	given	up	by	them,	as	was	customary
during	the	gambling	performances.
TEXT	12
त ᇿ य
	
स ᇮ ज न य ᇳ ह ष ᆾ
	
क ु ኄ व ृ ሬ ः
	
ि प त ा म ह ः
	
।
ि स ं ह न ा द ं
	
ि व न ሱ ो ᇫ च ै ः
	
श ङ ् ख ं
	
द ᇲ म ौ
	
प ् र त ा प व ा न ्
	
॥
१ २
॥
tasya	sañjanayan	harṣaṁ
kuru-vṛddhaḥ	pitāmahaḥ
siṁha-nādaṁ	vinadyoccaiḥ
śaṅkhaṁ	dadhmau	pratāpavān
tasya—
his;	
sañjanayan—
increasing;	
harṣam—
cheerfulness;	
kuru-vṛddhaḥ
—the	grandsire	of	the	Kuru	dynasty	(Bhīṣma);	
pitāmahaḥ—
the	grandfather;
siṁha-nādam—
roaring	sound,	like	a	lion;	
vinadya—
vibrating;	
uccaiḥ	
—very
loudly;	
śaṅkham—
conchshell;	
dadhmau—
blew;	
pratāpavān—
the	valiant.
TRANSLATION
Then	Bhīṣma,	the	great	valiant	grandsire	of	the	Kuru	dynasty,	the
grandfather	of	the	fighters,	blew	his	conchshell	very	loudly	like	the	sound
of	a	lion,	giving	Duryodhana	joy.
PURPORTThe	grandsire	of	the	Kuru	dynasty	could	understand	the	inner	meaning	of
the	heart	of	his	grandson	Duryodhana,	and	out	of	his	natural	compassion	for
him	he	tried	to	cheer	him	by	blowing	his	conchshell	very	loudly,	befitting	his
position	as	a	lion.	Indirectly,	by	the	symbolism	of	the	conchshell,	he	informed
his	depressed	grandson	Duryodhana	that	he	had	no	chance	of	victory	in	the
battle,	because	the	Supreme	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	was	on	the	other	side.	But	still,	it	was
his	duty	to	conduct	the	fight,	and	no	pains	would	be	spared	in	that	connection.
TEXT	13
त त ः
	
श ङ ् ख ा ᇽ च
	
भ े य ᆼ ᇽ च
	
प ण व ा न क ग ो म ु ख ा ः
	
।
स ह स ै व ा ᇷ य ह ᇳ य ᇳ त
	
स
	
श ᇶ द ᇿ त ु म ु ल ो ऽ भ व त ्
	
॥
१ ३
॥
tataḥ	śaṅkhāś	ca	bheryaś	ca
paṇavānaka-gomukhāḥ
sahasaivābhyahanyanta
sa	śabdas	tumulo	'bhavat
tataḥ—
thereafter;	
śaṅkhāḥ—
conchshells;	
ca—
also;	
bheryaḥ—
bugles;	
ca—
and;	
paṇava-ānaka—
trumpets	and	drums;	
go-mukhāḥ—
horns;	
sahasā—
all	of
a	sudden;	
eva—
certainly;	
abhyahanyanta—
being	simultaneously	sounded;	
saḥ
—
that;	
śabdaḥ—
combined	sound;	
tumulaḥ—
tumultuous;	
abhavat—
became.
TRANSLATION
After	that,	the	conchshells,	bugles,	trumpets,	drums	and	horns	were	all
suddenly	sounded,	and	the	combined	sound	was	tumultuous.
TEXT	14
त त ः
	
ᇽ व े त ै ह ᆼ य ै य ु ᆼ ᇧ त े
	
म ह ि त
	
ᇿ य ᇳ द न े
	
ि ᇿ थ त ौ
	
।
म ा ध व ः
	
प ा ᇯ ड व ᇽ च ै व
	
ि द ᇼ य ौ
	
श ङ ् ख ौ
	
प ् र द ᇲ म त ु ः
	
॥
१ ४
॥
tataḥ	śvetair	hayair	yukte
mahati	syandane	sthitau
mādhavaḥ	pāṇḍavaś	caivadivyau	śaṅkhau	pradadhmatuḥ
tataḥ—
thereafter;
	śvetaiḥ—
by	white;
	hayaiḥ—
horses;
	yukte—
being	yoked
with;
	mahati—
in	the	great;
	syandane—
chariot;
	sthitau—
so	situated;
	mādhavaḥ
—
Kṛṣṇa	(the	husband	of	the	goddess	of	fortune);	
pāṇḍavaḥ—	
Arjuna	(the	son
of	Pāṇḍu);	
ca—
also;	
eva—
certainly;	
divyau—
transcendental;	
śaṅkhau
—
conchshells;	
pradadhmatuḥ—
sounded.
TRANSLATION
On	the	other	side,	both	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	and	Arjuna,	stationed	on	a	great
chariot	drawn	by	white	horses,	sounded	their	transcendental	conchshells.
PURPORT
In	contrast	with	the	conchshell	blown	by	Bhīṣmadeva,	the	conchshells	in
the	hands	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	Arjuna	are	described	as	transcendental.	The	sounding
of	the	transcendental	conchshells	indicated	that	there	was	no	hope	of	victory
for	the	other	side	because	Kṛṣṇa	was	on	the	side	of	the	Pāṇḍavas.	
Jayas	tu
pāṇḍu-putrāṇāṁ	yeṣāṁ	pakṣe	janārdanaḥ.	
Victory	is	always	with	persons	like
the	sons	of	Pāṇḍu	because	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	associated	with	them.	And	whenever
and	wherever	the	Lord	is	present,	the	goddess	of	fortune	is	also	there	because
the	goddess	of	fortune	never	lives	alone	without	her	husband.	Therefore,
victory	and	fortune	were	awaiting	Arjuna,	as	indicated	by	the	transcendental
sound	produced	by	the	conchshell	of	Viṣṇu,	or	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.	Besides	that,	the
chariot	on	which	both	the	friends	were	seated	was	donated	by	Agni	(the	fire-
god)	to	Arjuna,	and	this	indicated	that	this	chariot	was	capable	of	conquering
all	sides,	wherever	it	was	drawn	over	the	three	worlds.
TEXT	15
प ा ᇮ च ज ᇳ य ं
	
ᇦ ष ी क े श ो
	
द े व द ሧ ं
	
ध न ᇮ ज य ः
	
।
प ौ ᇯ ड ् र ं
	
द ᇲ म ौ
	
म ह ा श ङ ् ख ं
	
भ ी म क म ा ᆼ
	
व ृ क ो द र ः
	
॥
१ ५
॥
pāñcajanyaṁ	hṛṣīkeśo
devadattaṁ	dhanañjayaḥpauṇḍraṁ	dadhmau	mahā-śaṅkhaṁ
bhīma-karmā	vṛkodaraḥ
pāñcajanyam—
the	conchshell	named	Pāñcajanya;	
hṛṣīkeśaḥ—
Hṛṣīkeśa
(Kṛṣṇa,	the	Lord	who	directs	the	senses	of	the	devotees);	
devadattam—
the
conchshell	named	Devadatta;	
dhanañjayaḥ—
Dhanañjaya	(Arjuna,	the	winner
of	wealth);	
pauṇḍram—
the	conch	named	Pauṇḍram;	
dadhmau—	
blew;	
mahā-
śaṅkham—
the	terrific	conchshell;	
bhīma-karmā—
one	who	performs
Herculean	tasks;	
vṛkodaraḥ—
the	voracious	eater	(Bhīma).
TRANSLATION
Then,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	blew	His	conchshell,	called	Pāñcajanya;	Arjuna
blew	his,	the	Devadatta;	and	Bhīma,	the	voracious	eater	and	performer	of
Herculean	tasks,	blew	his	terrific	conchshell	called	Pauṇḍram.
PURPORT
Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	referred	to	as	Hṛṣīkeśa	in	this	verse	because	He	is	the	owner
of	all	senses.	The	living	entities	are	part	and	parcel	of	Him,	and,	therefore,	the
senses	of	the	living	entities	are	also	part	and	parcel	of	His	senses.	The
impersonalists	cannot	account	for	the	senses	of	the	living	entities,	and
therefore	they	are	always	anxious	to	describe	all	living	entities	as	sense-less,
or	impersonal.	The	Lord,	situated	in	the	hearts	of	all	living	entities,	directs
their	senses.	But,	He	directs	in	terms	of	the	surrender	of	the	living	entity,	and
in	the	case	of	a	pure	devotee	He	directly	controls	the	senses.	Here	on	the
Battlefield	of	Kurukṣetra	the	Lord	directly	controls	the	transcendental	senses
of	Arjuna,	and	thus	His	particular	name	of	Hṛṣīkeśa.	The	Lord	has	different
names	according	to	His	different	activities.	For	example,	His	name	is
Madhusūdana	because	He	killed	the	demon	of	the	name	Madhu;	His	name	is
Govinda	because	He	gives	pleasure	to	the	cows	and	to	the	senses;	His	name	is
Vāsudeva	because	He	appeared	as	the	son	of	Vasudeva;	His	name	is	Devakī-
nandana	because	He	accepted	Devakī	as	His	mother;	His	name	is	Yaśodā-
nandana	because	He	awarded	His	childhood	pastimes	to	Yaśodā	at	Vṛndāvana;
His	name	is	Pārtha-sārathi	because	He	worked	as	charioteer	of	His	friend
Arjuna.	Similarly,	His	name	is	Hṛṣīkeśa	because	He	gave	direction	to	Arjuna
on	the	Battlefield	of	Kurukṣetra.Arjuna	is	referred	to	as	Dhanañjaya	in	this	verse	because	he	helped	his	elder
brother	in	fetching	wealth	when	it	was	required	by	the	King	to	make
expenditures	for	different	sacrifices.	Similarly,	Bhīma	is	known	as	Vṛkodara
because	he	could	eat	as	voraciously	as	he	could	perform	Herculean	tasks,	such
as	killing	the	demon	Hiḍimba.	So,	the	particular	types	of	conchshell	blown	by
the	different	personalities	on	the	side	of	the	Pāṇḍavas,	beginning	with	the
Lord's,	were	all	very	encouraging	to	the	fighting	soldiers.	On	the	other	side
there	were	no	such	credits,	nor	the	presence	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	the	supreme
director,	nor	that	of	the	goddess	of	fortune.	So,	they	were	predestined	to	lose
the	battle–and	that	was	the	message	announced	by	the	sounds	of	the
conchshells.
TEXTS	16-18
अ न ᇳ त ि व ज य ं
	
र ा ज ा
	
क ु ᇳ त ी प ु त ् र ो
	
य ु ि ध ि ᇾ ठ र ः
	
।
	
न क ु ल ः
	
स ह द े व ᇽ च
	
स ु घ ो ष म ि ण प ु ᇾ प क ौ
	
॥
१ ६
॥
	
क ा ᇽ य ᇽ च
	
प र म े ᇾ व ा स ः
	
ि श ख ᇯ ड ी
	
च
	
म ह ा र थ ः
	
।
	
ध ृ ᇾ ट ሱ ु ᇸ न ो
	
ि व र ा ट ᇽ च
	
स ा ᇰ य ि क ᇽ च ा प र ा ि ज त ः
	
॥
१ ७
॥
	
द ् ኄ प द ो
	
द ् र ौ प द े य ा ᇽ च
	
स व ᆼ श ः
	
प ृ ि थ व ी प त े
	
।
स ौ भ द ् र ᇽ च
	
म ह ा ब ा ह ु ः
	
श ङ ् ख ा ᇳ द ᇲ म ु ः
	
प ृ थ ᇧ प ृ थ क ्
	
॥
१ ८
॥
anantavijayaṁ	rājā
kuntī-putro	yudhiṣṭhiraḥ
nakulaḥ	sahadevaś	ca
sughoṣa-maṇipuṣpakau
kāśyaś	ca	parameṣvāsaḥ
śikhaṇḍī	ca	mahā-rathaḥ
dhṛṣṭadyumno	virāṭaś	ca
sātyakiś	cāparājitaḥ
drupado	draupadeyāś	ca
sarvaśaḥ	pṛthivī-pate
saubhadraś	ca	mahā-bāhuḥ
śaṅkhān	dadhmuḥ	pṛthak	pṛthak
anantavijayam
—the	conch	named	Anantavijaya;	
rājā
—the	king;	
kuntī-
putraḥ
—the	son	of	Kuntī;	
yudhiṣṭhiraḥ
—Yudhiṣṭhira;	
nakulaḥ
—Nakula;
sahadevaḥ
—Sahadeva;	
ca
—and;	
sughoṣa-maṇipuṣpakau
—the	conchesnamed	Sughoṣa	and	Maṇipuṣpaka;	
kāśyaḥ
—the	King	of	Kāśī	(Vārāṇasī);	
ca
—
and;	
parameṣvāsaḥ
—the	great	archer;	
śikhaṇḍī
—Śikhaṇḍī;	
ca
—also;	
mahā-
rathaḥ
—one	who	can	fight	alone	against	thousands;	
dhṛṣṭadyumnaḥ
—
Dhṛṣṭadyumna	(the	son	of	King	Drupada);	
virāṭaḥ
—Virāṭa	(the	prince	who
gave	shelter	to	the	Pāṇḍavas	while	they	were	in	disguise);	
ca
—also;	
sātyakiḥ
—Sātyaki	(the	same	as	Yuyudhāna,	the	charioteer	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa);	
ca
—and;
aparājitaḥ
—who	were	never	vanquished	before;	
drupadaḥ
—Drupada,	the
King	of	Pāñcāla;	
draupadeyāḥ
—the	sons	of	Draupadī;	
ca
—also;	
sarvaśaḥ
—
all;	
pṛthivī-pate
—O	King;	
saubhadraḥ
—the	son	of	Subhadrā	(Abhimanyu);
ca
—also;	
mahā-bāhuḥ
—greatly	armed;	
śaṅkhān
—conchshells;	
dadhmuḥ
—
blew;	
pṛthak	pṛthak
—each	separately.
TRANSLATION
King	Yudhiṣṭhira,	the	son	of	Kuntī,	blew	his	conchshell,	the
Anantavijaya,	and	Nakula	and	Sahadeva	blew	the	Sughoṣa	and
Maṇipuṣpaka.	That	great	archer	the	King	of	Kāśī,	the	great	fighter
Śikhaṇḍī,	Dhṛṣṭadyumna,	Virāṭa	and	the	unconquerable	Sātyaki,
Drupada,	the	sons	of	Draupadī,	and	the	others,	O	King,	such	as	the	son	of
Subhadrā,	greatly	armed,	all	blew	their	respective	conchshells.
PURPORT
Sañjaya	informed	King	Dhṛtarāṣṭra	very	tactfully	that	his	unwise	policy	of
deceiving	the	sons	of	Pāṇḍu	and	endeavoring	to	enthrone	his	own	sons	on	the
seat	of	the	kingdom	was	not	very	laudable.	The	signs	already	clearly	indicated
that	the	whole	Kuru	dynasty	would	be	killed	in	that	great	battle.	Beginning
with	the	grandsire,	Bhīṣma,	down	to	the	grandsons	like	Abhimanyu	and
others–including	kings	from	many	states	of	the	world	—all	were	present	there,
and	all	were	doomed.	The	whole	catastrophe	was	due	to	King	Dhṛtarāṣṭra,
because	he	encouraged	the	policy	followed	by	his	sons.
TEXT	19
स
	
घ ो ष ो
	
ध ा त ᆼ र ा ᇾ ट ् र ा ण ा ं
	
ᇦ द य ा ि न
	
ᇼ य द ा र य त ्
	
।
न भ ᇽ च
	
प ृ ि थ व ी ं
	
च ै व
	
त ु म ु ल ो ऽ ᇷ य न ु न ा द य न ्
	
॥
१ ९
॥sa	ghoṣo	dhārtarāṣṭrāṇāṁ
hṛdayāni	vyadārayat
nabhaś	ca	pṛthivīṁ	caiva
tumulo	'bhyanunādayan
saḥ—
that;	
ghoṣaḥ—
vibration;	
dhārtarāṣṭrāṇām—
of	the	sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra;
hṛdayāni—
hearts;	
vyadārayat—
shattered;	
nabhaḥ—
the	sky;	
ca—
also;
pṛthivīm—
the	surface	of	the	earth;	
ca—
also;	
eva—
certainly;	
tumulaḥ—
uproarious;	
abhyanunādayan—
by	resounding.
TRANSLATION
The	blowing	of	these	different	conchshells	became	uproarious,	and
thus,	vibrating	both	in	the	sky	and	on	the	earth,	it	shattered	the	hearts	of
the	sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra.
PURPORT
When	Bhīṣma	and	the	others	on	the	side	of	Duryodhana	blew	their
respective	conchshells,	there	was	no	heart-breaking	on	the	part	of	the
Pāṇḍavas.	Such	occurrences	are	not	mentioned,	but	in	this	particular	verse	it	is
mentioned	that	the	hearts	of	the	sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra	were	shattered	by	the
sounds	vibrated	by	the	Pāṇḍavas'	party.	This	is	due	to	the	Pāṇḍavas	and	their
confidence	in	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.	One	who	takes	shelter	of	the	Supreme	Lord	has
nothing	to	fear,	even	in	the	midst	of	the	greatest	calamity.
TEXT	20
अ थ
	
ᇼ य व ि ᇿ थ त ा ᇳ द ृ ᇾ ट ् व ा
	
ध ा त ᆼ र ा ᇾ ट ् र ा ᇳ क ि प ᇲ व ज ः
	
।
प ् र व ृ ሧ े
	
श ᇿ त ् र स ᇸ प ा त े
	
ध न ु ኄ ሱ ᇸ य
	
प ा ᇯ ड व ः
	
।
ᇦ ष ी क े श ं
	
त द ा
	
व ा ᇧ य ि म द म ा ह
	
म ह ी प त े
	
॥
२ ०
॥
atha	vyavasthitān	dṛṣṭvā
dhārtarāṣṭrān	kapi-dhvajaḥ
pravṛtte	śastra-sampāte
dhanur	udyamya	pāṇḍavaḥhṛṣīkeśaṁ	tadā	vākyam
idam	āha	mahī-pate
atha—
thereupon;	
vyavasthitān—
situated;	
dṛṣṭvā—
looking	 on;
dhārtarāṣṭrān—
the	sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra;	
kapi-dhvajaḥ—
one	whose	flag	is
marked	with	Hanumān;	
pravṛtte—
while	about	to	be	engaged;	
śastra-sampāte
—
the	arrows	released;	
dhanuḥ—
bow;	
udyamya—
after	taking	up;	
pāṇḍavaḥ—
the	son	of	Pāṇḍu	(Arjuna);	
hṛṣīkeśam—
unto	Lord	Kṛṣṇa;	
tadā—
at	that	time;
vākyam—
words;	
idam—
these;	
āha—
said;	
mahī-pate—
O	King.
TRANSLATION
O	King,	at	that	time	Arjuna,	the	son	of	Pāṇḍu,	who	was	seated	in	his
chariot,	his	flag	marked	with	Hanumān,	took	up	his	bow	and	prepared	to
shoot	his	arrows,	looking	at	the	sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra.	O	King,	Arjuna	then
spoke	to	Hṛṣīkeśa	[Kṛṣṇa]	these	words:
PURPORT
The	battle	was	just	about	to	begin.	It	is	understood	from	the	above
statement	that	the	sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra	were	more	or	less	disheartened	by	the
unexpected	arrangement	of	military	force	by	the	Pāṇḍavas,	who	were	guided
by	the	direct	instructions	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	on	the	battlefield.	The	emblem	of
Hanumān	on	the	flag	of	Arjuna	is	another	sign	of	victory	because	Hanumān
cooperated	with	Lord	Rāma	in	the	battle	between	Rāma	and	Rāvaṇa,	and	Lord
Rāma	emerged	victorious.	Now	both	Rāma	and	Hanumān	were	present	on	the
chariot	of	Arjuna	to	help	him.	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	Rāma	Himself,	and	wherever
Lord	Rāma	is,	His	eternal	servitor	Hanumān	and	His	eternal	consort	Sītā,	the
goddess	of	fortune,	are	present.	Therefore,	Arjuna	had	no	cause	to	fear	any
enemies	whatsoever.	And	above	all,	the	Lord	of	the	senses,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	was
personally	present	to	give	him	direction.	Thus,	all	good	counsel	was	available
to	Arjuna	in	the	matter	of	executing	the	battle.	In	such	auspicious	conditions,
arranged	by	the	Lord	for	His	eternal	devotee,	lay	the	signs	of	assured	victory.
TEXTS	21-22अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
स े न य ो ኄ भ य ो म ᆼ ᇲ य े
	
र थ ं
	
ᇿ थ ा प य
	
म े ऽ ᇫ य ु त
	
॥
२ १
॥
य ा व द े त ा ि ᇳ न र ी ᇤ े ऽ ह ं
	
य ो ሬ ु क ा म ा न व ि ᇿ थ त ा न ्
	
।
क ै म ᆼ य ा
	
स ह
	
य ो ሬ ᇼ य म ि ᇿ म न ् र ण स म ु ሱ म े
	
॥
२ २
॥
arjuna	uvāca
senayor	ubhayor	madhye
rathaṁ	sthāpaya	me	'cyuta
yāvad	etān	nirīkṣe	'haṁ
yoddhu-kāmān	avasthitān
kair	mayā	saha	yoddhavyam
asmin	raṇa-samudyame
arjunaḥ—
Arjuna;	
uvāca—
said;	
senayoḥ—
of	the	armies;	
ubhayoḥ—
of	both
the	parties;	
madhye—
in	between	them;	
ratham—
the	chariot;	
sthāpaya—
please	keep;	
me—
my;	
acyuta—
O	infallible	one;	
yāvat—
as	long	as;	
etān—	
all
these;	
nirīkṣe—
may	look;	
aham—
I;	
yoddhu-kāmān—
desiring	to	fight;
avasthitān—
arrayed	on	the	battlefield;	
kaiḥ—
with	whom;	
mayā—
by	me;	
saha
—
with;	
yoddhavyam—
to	fight	with;	
asmin—
in	this;	
raṇa—
strife;	
samudyame
—
in	the	attempt.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	said:	O	infallible	one,	please	draw	my	chariot	between	the	two
armies	so	that	I	may	see	who	is	present	here,	who	is	desirous	of	fighting,
and	with	whom	I	must	contend	in	this	great	battle	attempt.
PURPORT
Although	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	out	of	His
causeless	mercy	He	was	engaged	in	the	service	of	His	friend.	He	never	fails	in
His	affection	for	His	devotees,	and	thus	He	is	addressed	herein	as	infallible.
As	charioteer,	He	had	to	carry	out	the	orders	of	Arjuna,	and	since	He	did	not
hesitate	to	do	so,	He	is	addressed	as	infallible.	Although	He	had	accepted	the
position	of	a	charioteer	for	His	devotee,	His	supreme	position	was	not
challenged.	In	all	circumstances,	He	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
Hṛṣīkeśa,	the	Lord	of	the	total	senses.	The	relationship	between	the	Lord	andHis	servitor	is	very	sweet	and	transcendental.	The	servitor	is	always	ready	to
render	a	service	to	the	Lord,	and,	similarly,	the	Lord	is	always	seeking	an
opportunity	to	render	some	service	to	the	devotee.	He	takes	greater	pleasure	in
His	pure	devotee's	assuming	the	advantageous	postion	of	ordering	Him	than
He	does	in	being	the	giver	of	orders.	As	master,	everyone	is	under	His	orders,
and	no	one	is	above	Him	to	order	Him.	But	when	he	finds	that	a	pure	devotee
is	ordering	Him,	He	obtains	transcendental	pleasure,	although	He	is	the
infallible	master	of	all	circumstances.
As	a	pure	devotee	of	the	Lord,	Arjuna	had	no	desire	to	fight	with	his
cousins	and	brothers,	but	he	was	forced	to	come	onto	the	battlefield	by	the
obstinacy	of	Duryodhana,	who	was	never	agreeable	to	any	peaceful
negotiation.	Therefore,	he	was	very	anxious	to	see	who	the	leading	persons
present	on	the	battlefield	were.	Although	there	was	no	question	of	a
peacemaking	endeavor	on	the	battlefield,	he	wanted	to	see	them	again,	and	to
see	how	much	they	were	bent	upon	demanding	an	unwanted	war.
TEXT	23
य ो ᇰ ᇿ य म ा न ा न व े ᇤ े ऽ ह ं
	
य
	
ए त े ऽ त ् र
	
स म ा ग त ा ः
	
।
ध ा त ᆼ र ा ᇾ ट ् र ᇿ य
	
द ु ब ु ᆼ ሬ े य ु ᆼ ሬ े
	
ि प ् र य ि च क ी ष ᆼ व ः
	
॥
२ ३
॥
yotsyamānān	avekṣe	'haṁ
ya	ete	'tra	samāgatāḥ
dhārtarāṣṭrasya	durbuddher
yuddhe	priya-cikīrṣavaḥ
yotsyamānān—
those	who	will	be	fighting;	
avekṣe—
let	me	see;	
aham—
I;
	ye
—
who;	
ete—
those;	
atra—
here;	
samāgatāḥ—
assembled;	
dhārtarāṣṭrasya—	
the
son	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra;	
durbuddheḥ—
evil-minded;	
yuddhe—
in	the	fight;	
priya
—
well;	
cikīrṣavaḥ—
wishing.
TRANSLATION
Let	me	see	those	who	have	come	here	to	fight,	wishing	to	please	the
evil-minded	son	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra.
PURPORTIt	was	an	open	secret	that	Duryodhana	wanted	to	usurp	the	kingdom	of	the
Pāṇḍavas	by	evil	plans,	in	collaboration	with	his	father,	Dhṛtarāṣṭra.
Therefore,	all	persons	who	had	joined	the	side	of	Duryodhana	must	have	been
birds	of	the	same	feather.	Arjuna	wanted	to	see	them	in	the	battlefield	before
the	fight	was	begun,	just	to	learn	who	they	were,	but	he	had	no	intention	of
proposing	peace	negotiations	with	them.	It	was	also	a	fact	that	he	wanted	to
see	them	to	make	an	estimate	of	the	strength	which	he	had	to	face,	although	he
was	quite	confident	of	victory	because	Kṛṣṇa	was	sitting	by	his	side.
TEXT	24
स ᇮ ज य
	
उ व ा च
	
।
ए व म ु ᇧ त ो
	
ᇦ ष ी क े श ो
	
ग ु ड ा क े श े न
	
भ ा र त
	
।
स े न य ो ኄ भ य ो म ᆼ ᇲ य े
	
ᇿ थ ा प ि य ᇰ व ा
	
र थ ो ሧ म म ्
	
॥
२ ४
॥
sañjaya	uvāca
evam	ukto	hṛṣīkeśo
guḍākeśena	bhārata
senayor	ubhayor	madhye
sthāpayitvā	rathottamam
sañjayaḥ—
Sañjaya;	
uvāca—
said;	
evam—
thus;	
uktaḥ—
addressed;	
hṛṣīkeśaḥ
—Lord	Kṛṣṇa;	
guḍākeśena—
by	Arjuna;	
bhārata—
O	descendant	of	Bharata;
senayoḥ—
of	armies;
	ubhayoḥ—
of	both;	
madhye—
in	the	midst	of;	
sthāpayitvā
—
by	placing;	
rathottamam—
the	finest	chariot.
TRANSLATION
Sañjaya	said:	O	descendant	of	Bharata,	being	thus	addressed	by
Arjuna,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	drew	up	the	fine	chariot	in	the	midst	of	the	armies	of
both	parties.
PURPORT
In	this	verse	Arjuna	is	referred	to	as	Guḍākeśa.	
Guḍāka	
means	sleep,	andone	who	conquers	sleep	is	called	
guḍākeśa.	
Sleep	also	means	ignorance.	So
Arjuna	conquered	both	sleep	and	ignorance	because	of	his	friendship	with
Kṛṣṇa.	As	a	great	devotee	of	Kṛṣṇa,	he	could	not	forget	Kṛṣṇa	even	for	a
moment,	because	that	is	the	nature	of	a	devotee.	Either	in	waking	or	in	sleep,	a
devotee	of	the	Lord	can	never	be	free	from	thinking	of	Kṛṣṇa's	name,	form,
quality	and	pastimes.	Thus	a	devotee	of	Kṛṣṇa	can	conquer	both	sleep	and
ignorance	simply	by	thinking	of	Kṛṣṇa	constantly.	This	is	called	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	or	
samādhi.	
As	Hṛṣīkeśa,	or	the	director	of	the	senses	and	mind
of	every	living	entity,	Kṛṣṇa	could	understand	Arjuna's	purpose	in	placing	the
chariot	in	the	midst	of	the	armies.	Thus	He	did	so,	and	spoke	as	follows.
TEXT	25
भ ी ᇾ म द ् र ो ण प ् र म ु ख त ः
	
स व ᆹ ष ा ं
	
च
	
म ह ी ि ᇤ त ा म ्
	
।
उ व ा च
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
प ᇽ य ै त ा ᇳ स म व े त ा ᇳ क ु ኅ ि न ि त
	
॥
२ ५
॥
bhīṣma-droṇa-pramukhataḥ
sarveṣāṁ	ca	mahīkṣitām
uvāca	pārtha	paśyaitān
samavetān	kurūn	iti
bhīṣma—
Grandfather	Bhīṣma;	
droṇa—
the	teacher	Droṇa;
	pramukhataḥ—
in	the	front	of;	
sarveṣām—
all;	
ca—
also;
	mahīkṣitām—
chiefs	of	the	world;
uvāca—
said;	
pārtha—
O	Pārtha	(son	of	Pṛthā);	
paśya—
just	behold;	
etān—
all
of	them;	
samavetān—
assembled;	
kurūn—
all	the	members	of	the	
Kuru
dynasty;	
iti—
thus.
TRANSLATION
In	the	presence	of	Bhīṣma,	Droṇa	and	all	other	chieftains	of	the	world,
Hṛṣīkeśa,	the	Lord,	said,	Just	behold,	Pārtha,	all	the	Kurus	who	are
assembled	here.
PURPORT
As	the	Supersoul	of	all	living	entities,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	could	understand	whatwas	going	on	in	the	mind	of	Arjuna.	The	use	of	the	word	Hṛṣīkeśa	in	this
connection	indicates	that	He	knew	everything.	And	the	word	Pārtha,	or	the
son	of	Kuntī	or	Pṛthā,	is	also	similarly	significant	in	reference	to	Arjuna.	As	a
friend,	He	wanted	to	inform	Arjuna	that	because	Arjuna	was	the	son	of	Pṛthā,
the	sister	of	His	own	father	Vasudeva,	He	had	agreed	to	be	the	charioteer	of
Arjuna.	Now	what	did	Kṛṣṇa	mean	when	He	told	Arjuna	to	"behold	the
Kurus"?	Did	Arjuna	want	to	stop	there	and	not	fight?	Kṛṣṇa	never	expected
such	things	from	the	son	of	His	aunt	Pṛthā.	The	mind	of	Arjuna	was	thus
predicated	by	the	Lord	in	friendly	joking.
TEXT	26
त त ् र ा प ᇽ य ि ᇰ ᇿ थ त ा ᇳ प ा थ ᆼ ः
	
ि प त ॄ न थ
	
ि प त ा म ह ा न ्
	
।
आ च ा य ा ᆼ ᇳ म ा त ु ल ा ᇳ भ ् र ा त ॄ ᇳ प ु त ् र ा ᇳ प ौ त ् र ा ᇳ स ख ी ं ᇿ त थ ा
	
।
ᇽ व श ु र ा ᇳ स ु ᇦ द ᇽ च ै व
	
स े न य ो ኄ भ य ो र ि प
	
॥
२ ६
॥
tatrāpaśyat	sthitān	pārthaḥ
pitṝn	atha	pitāmahān
ācāryān	mātulān	bhrātṝn
putrān	pautrān	sakhīṁs	tathā
śvaśurān	suhṛdaś	caiva
senayor	ubhayor	api
tatra—
there;	
apaśyat—
he	could	see;	
sthitān—
standing;	
pārthaḥ—
Arjuna;
pitṝn—
fathers;	
atha—
also;	
pitāmahān—
grandfathers;	
ācāryān—
teachers;
mātulān—
maternal	uncles;	
bhrātṝn—
brothers;	
putrān—
sons;	
pautrān
—
grandsons;	
sakhīn—
friends;	
tathā—
too,	
śvaśurān—
fathers-in-law;	
suhṛdaḥ
—
wellwishers;	
ca—
also;	
eva—
certainly;	
senayoḥ—
of	the	armies;	
ubhayoḥ
—
of	both	parties;	
api—
including.
TRANSLATION
There	Arjuna	could	see,	within	the	midst	of	the	armies	of	both	parties,
his	fathers,	grandfathers,	teachers,	maternal	uncles,	brothers,	sons,
grandsons,	friends,	and	also	his	father-in-law	and	well-wishers—all
present	there.PURPORT
On	the	battlefield	Arjuna	could	see	all	kinds	of	relatives.	He	could	see
persons	like	Bhūriśravā,	who	were	his	father's	contemporaries,	grandfathers
Bhīṣma	and	Somadatta,	teachers	like	Droṇācārya	and	Kṛpācārya,	maternal
uncles	like	Śalya	and	Śakuni,	brothers	like	Duryodhana,	sons	like	Lakṣmaṇa,
friends	like	Aśvatthāmā,	well-wishers	like	Kṛtavarmā,	etc.	He	could	see	also
the	armies	which	contained	many	of	his	friends.
TEXT	27
त ा ᇳ स म ी ቎ य
	
स
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य ः
	
स व ा ᆼ ᇳ ब ᇳ ध ू न व ि ᇿ थ त ा न ्
	
।
क ृ प य ा
	
प र य ा ि व ᇾ ट ो
	
ि व ष ी द ि ᇳ न द म ब ् र व ी त ्
	
॥
२ ७
॥
tān	samīkṣya	sa	kaunteyaḥ
sarvān	bandhūn	avasthitān
kṛpayā	parayāviṣṭo
viṣīdann	idam	abravīt
tān—
all	of	them;	
samīkṣya—
after	seeing;	
saḥ—
he;	
kaunteyaḥ—
the	son	of
Kuntī;	
sarvān—
all	kinds	of;	
bandhūn—
relatives;	
avasthitān—
situated;	
kṛpayā
—by	compassion;	
parayā—
of	a	high	grade;	
āviṣṭaḥ—
overwhelmed	by;
viṣīdan—
while	lamenting;	
idam—
thus;	
abravīt—
spoke.
TRANSLATION
When	the	son	of	Kuntī,	Arjuna,	saw	all	these	different	grades	of	friends
and	relatives,	he	became	overwhelmed	with	compassion	and	spoke	thus:
TEXT	28
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
द ृ ᇾ ट ् व े म ं
	
ᇿ व ज न ं
	
क ृ ᇾ ण
	
य ु य ु ᇰ स ु ं
	
स म ु प ि ᇿ थ त म ्
	
।
स ी द ि ᇳ त
	
म म
	
ग ा त ् र ा ि ण
	
म ु ख ं
	
च
	
प ि र श ु ᇾ य ि त
	
॥
२ ८
॥
arjuna	uvācadṛṣṭvemaṁ	svajanaṁ	kṛṣṇa
yuyutsuṁ	samupasthitam
sīdanti	mama	gātrāṇi
mukhaṁ	ca	pariśuṣyati
arjunaḥ—
Arjuna;	
uvāca—
said;	
dṛṣṭvā—
after	seeing;	
imam—
all	these;
svajanam—
kinsmen;	
kṛṣṇa—
O	Kṛṣṇa;	
yuyutsum—
all	in	fighting	spirit;
samupasthitam—
all	present;	
sīdanti—
quivering;	
mama—
my;	
gātrāṇi—
limbs
of	the	body;	
mukham—
mouth;	
ca—
also;	
pariśuṣyati—
drying	up.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	said:	My	dear	Kṛṣṇa,	seeing	my	friends	and	relatives	present
before	me	in	such	a	fighting	spirit,	I	feel	the	limbs	of	my	body	quivering
and	my	mouth	drying	up.
PURPORT
Any	man	who	has	genuine	devotion	to	the	Lord	has	all	the	good	qualities
which	are	found	in	godly	persons	or	in	the	demigods,	whereas	the	nondevotee,
however	advanced	he	may	be	in	material	qualifications	by	education	and
culture,	lacks	in	godly	qualities.	As	such,	Arjuna,	just	after	seeing	his
kinsmen,	friends	and	relatives	on	the	battlefield,	was	at	once	overwhelmed	by
compassion	for	them	who	had	so	decided	to	fight	amongst	themselves.	As	far
as	his	soldiers	were	concerned,	he	was	sympathetic	from	the	beginning,	but	he
felt	compassion	even	for	the	soldiers	of	the	opposite	party,	foreseeing	their
imminent	death.	And	so	thinking,	the	limbs	of	his	body	began	to	quiver,	and
his	mouth	became	dry.	He	was	more	or	less	astonished	to	see	their	fighting
spirit.	Practically	the	whole	community,	all	blood	relatives	of	Arjuna,	had
come	to	fight	with	him.	This	overwhelmed	a	kind	devotee	like	Arjuna.
Although	it	is	not	mentioned	here,	still	one	can	easily	imagine	that	not	only
were	Arjuna's	bodily	limbs	quivering	and	his	mouth	drying	up,	but	that	he	was
also	crying	out	of	compassion.	Such	symptoms	in	Arjuna	were	not	due	to
weakness	but	to	his	softheartedness,	a	characteristic	of	a	pure	devotee	of	the
Lord.	It	is	said	therefore:
yasyāsti	bhaktir	bhagavaty	akiñcanāsarvair	guṇais	tatra	samāsate	surāḥ
harāv	abhaktasya	kuto	mahad-guṇā
mano-rathenāsati	dhāvato	bahiḥ
"One	who	has	unflinching	devotion	for	the	Personality	of	Godhead	has	all	the
good	qualities	of	the	demigods.	But	one	who	is	not	a	devotee	of	the	Lord	has
only	material	qualifications	that	are	of	little	value.	This	is	because	he	is
hovering	on	the	mental	plane	and	is	certain	to	be	attracted	by	the	glaring
material	energy."	
(Bhāg.	
5.18.12)
TEXT	29
व े प थ ु ᇽ च
	
श र ी र े
	
म े
	
र ो म ह ष ᆼ ᇽ च
	
ज ा य त े
	
।
ग ा ᇯ ड ी व ं
	
स ् र ं स त े
	
ह ᇿ त ा ᇰ ᇰ व ᇧ च ै व
	
प ि र द ቋ त े
	
॥
२ ९
॥
vepathuś	ca	śarīre	me
roma-harṣaś	ca	jāyate
gāṇḍīvaṁ	sraṁsate	hastāt
tvak	caiva	paridahyate
vepathuḥ—
trembling	of	the	body;	
ca—
also;	
śarīre—
on	the	body;	
me—
my;
roma-harṣaḥ—
standing	of	hair	on	end;	
ca—
also;	
jāyate—
is	taking	place;
gāṇḍīvam—
the	bow	of	Arjuna;	
sraṁsate—
is	slipping;	
hastāt—
from	the	hands;
tvak—
skin;	
ca—
also;	
eva—
certainly;	
paridahyate—
burning.
TRANSLATION
My	whole	body	is	trembling,	and	my	hair	is	standing	on	end.	My	bow
Gāṇḍīva	is	slipping	from	my	hand,	and	my	skin	is	burning.
PURPORT
There	are	two	kinds	of	trembling	of	the	body,	and	two	kinds	of	standings	of
the	hair	on	end.	Such	phenomena	occur	either	in	great	spiritual	ecstasy	or	out
of	great	fear	under	material	conditions.	There	is	no	fear	in	transcendental
realization.	Arjuna's	symptoms	in	this	situation	are	out	of	material	fear–namely,	loss	of	life.	This	is	evident	from	other	symptoms	also;	he	became	so
impatient	that	his	famous	bow	Gāṇḍīva	was	slipping	from	his	hands,	and,
because	his	heart	was	burning	within	him,	he	was	feeling	a	burning	sensation
of	the	skin.	All	these	are	due	to	a	material	conception	of	life.
TEXT	30
न
	
च
	
श ᇧ न ो ᇸ य व ᇿ थ ा त ु ं
	
भ ् र म त ी व
	
च
	
म े
	
म न ः
	
।
ि न ि म ሧ ा ि न
	
च
	
प ᇽ य ा ि म
	
ि व प र ी त ा ि न
	
क े श व
	
॥
३ ०
॥
na	ca	śaknomy	avasthātuṁ
bhramatīva	ca	me	manaḥ
nimittāni	ca	paśyāmi
viparītāni	keśava
na—
nor;	
ca—
also;	
śaknomi—
am	I	able;	
avasthātum—
to	stay;	
bhramati—
forgetting;	
iva—
as;	
ca—
and;	
me—
my;	
manaḥ—
mind;	
nimittāni—
causes;	
ca
—
also;	
paśyāmi—
I	foresee;	
viparītāni—
just	the	opposite;	
keśava
—O	killer	of
the	demon	Keśī	(Kṛṣṇa).
TRANSLATION
I	am	now	unable	to	stand	here	any	longer.	I	am	forgetting	myself,	and
my	mind	is	reeling.	I	foresee	only	evil,	O	killer	of	the	Keśī	demon.
PURPORT
Due	to	his	impatience,	Arjuna	was	unable	to	stay	on	the	battlefield,	and	he
was	forgetting	himself	on	account	of	the	weakness	of	his	mind.	Excessive
attachment	for	material	things	puts	a	man	in	a	bewildering	condition	of
existence.	
Bhayaṁ	dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ:
	such	fearfulness	and	loss	of	mental
equilibrium	take	place	in	persons	who	are	too	affected	by	material	conditions.
Arjuna	envisioned	only	unhappiness	in	the	battlefield
—
he	would	not	be	happy
even	by	gaining	victory	over	the	foe.	The	word	
nimitta
	is	significant.	When	a
man	sees	only	frustration	in	his	expectations,	he	thinks,	"Why	am	I	here?"
Everyone	is	interested	in	himself	and	his	own	welfare.	No	one	is	interested	inthe	Supreme	Self.	Arjuna	is	supposed	to	show	disregard	for	self-interest	by
submission	to	the	will	of	Kṛṣṇa,	who	is	everyone's	real	self-interest.	The
conditioned	soul	forgets	this,	and	therefore	suffers	material	pains.	Arjuna
thought	that	his	victory	in	the	battle	would	only	be	a	cause	of	lamentation	for
him.
TEXT	31
न
	
च
	
श ् र े य ो ऽ न ु प ᇽ य ा ि म
	
ह ᇰ व ा
	
ᇿ व ज न म ा ह व े
	
।
न
	
क ा ङ ् ᇤ े
	
ि व ज य ं
	
क ृ ᇾ ण
	
न
	
च
	
र ा ᇬ य ं
	
स ु ख ा ि न
	
च
	
॥
३ १
॥
na	ca	śreyo	'nupaśyāmi
hatvā	svajanam	āhave
na	kāṅkṣe	vijayaṁ	kṛṣṇa
na	ca	rājyaṁ	sukhāni	ca
na—
nor;	
ca—
also;	
śreyaḥ—
good;	
anupaśyāmi—
do	I	foresee;	
hatvā—
by
killing;	
svajanam—
own	kinsmen;	
āhave—
in	the	fight;	
na—
nor;	
kāṅkṣe—
do	I
desire;	
vijayam—
victory;	
kṛṣṇa—
O	Kṛṣṇa;	
na—
nor;	
ca—
also;	
rājyam
—
kingdom;	
sukhāni—
happiness	thereof;	
ca—
also.
TRANSLATION
I	do	not	see	how	any	good	can	come	from	killing	my	own	kinsmen	in
this	battle,	nor	can	I,	my	dear	Kṛṣṇa,	desire	any	subsequent	victory,
kingdom,	or	happiness.
PURPORT
Without	knowing	that	one's	self-interest	is	in	Viṣṇu	(or	Kṛṣṇa),	conditioned
souls	are	attracted	by	bodily	relationships,	hoping	to	be	happy	in	such
situations.	Under	delusion,	they	forget	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	also	the	cause	of	material
happiness.	Arjuna	appears	to	have	even	forgotten	the	moral	codes	for	a
kṣatriya.	
It	is	said	that	two	kinds	of	men,	namely	the	
kṣatriya	
who	dies
directly	in	front	of	the	battlefield	under	Kṛṣṇa's	personal	orders	and	the	person
in	the	renounced	order	of	life	who	is	absolutely	devoted	to	spiritual	culture,are	eligible	to	enter	into	the	sun-globe,	which	is	so	powerful	and	dazzling.
Arjuna	is	reluctant	even	to	kill	his	enemies,	let	alone	his	relatives.	He	thought
that	by	killing	his	kinsmen	there	would	be	no	happiness	in	his	life,	and
therefore	he	was	not	willing	to	fight,	just	as	a	person	who	does	not	feel	hunger
is	not	inclined	to	cook.	He	has	now	decided	to	go	into	the	forest	and	live	a
secluded	life	in	frustration.	But	as	a	
kṣatriya,	
he	requires	a	kingdom	for	his
subsistence,	because	the	
kṣatriyas	
cannot	engage	themselves	in	any	other
occupation.	But	Arjuna	has	had	no	kingdom.	Arjuna's	sole	opportunity	for
gaining	a	kingdom	lay	in	fighting	with	his	cousins	and	brothers	and
reclaiming	the	kingdom	inherited	from	his	father,	which	he	does	not	like	to	do.
Therefore	he	considers	himself	fit	to	go	to	the	forest	to	live	a	secluded	life	of
frustration.
TEXTS	32-35
ि क ं
	
न ो
	
र ा ᇬ य े न
	
ग ो ि व ᇳ द
	
ि क ं
	
भ ो ग ै ज ी ᆼ ि व त े न
	
व ा
	
।
य े ष ा म थ ᆹ
	
क ा ङ ् ि ᇤ त ं
	
न ो
	
र ा ᇬ य ं
	
भ ो ग ा ः
	
स ु ख ा ि न
	
च
	
॥
३ २
॥
त
	
इ म े ऽ व ि ᇿ थ त ा
	
य ु ሬ े
	
प ् र ा ण ा ं ᇿ ᇰ य ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
ध न ा ि न
	
च
	
।
आ च ा य ा ᆼ ः
	
ि प त र ः
	
प ु त ् र ा ᇿ त थ ै व
	
च
	
ि प त ा म ह ा ः
	
॥
३ ३
॥
म ा त ु ल ा ः
	
ᇽ व श ु र ा ः
	
प ौ त ् र ा ः
	
ᇽ य ा ल ा ः
	
स ᇸ ब ि ᇳ ध न ᇿ त थ ा
	
।
ए त ा ᇳ न
	
ह ᇳ त ु ि म ᇫ छ ा ि म
	
ᇪ न त ो ऽ ि प
	
म ध ु स ू द न
	
॥
३ ४
॥
अ ि प
	
त ् र ै ल ो ᇧ य र ा ᇬ य ᇿ य
	
ह े त ो ः
	
ि क ं
	
न ु
	
म ह ी क ृ त े
	
।
ि न ह ᇰ य
	
ध ा त ᆼ र ा ᇾ ट ् र ा ᇳ न ः
	
क ा
	
प ् र ी ि त ः
	
ᇿ य ा ᇬ ज न ा द ᆼ न
	
॥
३ ५
॥
kiṁ	no	rājyena	govinda
kiṁ	bhogair	jīvitena	vā
yeṣām	arthe	kāṅkṣitaṁ	no
rājyaṁ	bhogāḥ	sukhāni	ca
ta	ime	'vasthitā	yuddhe
prāṇāṁs	tyaktvā	dhanāni	ca
ācāryāḥ	pitaraḥ	putrās
tathaiva	ca	pitāmahāḥ
mātulāḥ	śvaśurāḥ	pautrāḥ
śyālāḥ	sambandhinas	tathā
etān	na	hantum	icchāmi
ghnato	'pi	madhusūdana
api	trailokya-rājyasya
hetoḥ	kiṁ	nu	mahī-kṛtenihatya	dhārtarāṣṭrān	naḥ
kā	prītiḥ	syāj	janārdana
kim—
what	use;	
naḥ—
to	us;	
rājyena—
is	the	kingdom;	
govinda—
O	Kṛṣṇa;
kim—
what;	
bhogaiḥ—
enjoyment;	
jīvitena—
by	living;	
vā—
either;	
yeṣām—
for
whom;	
arthe—
for	the	matter	of;	
kāṅkṣitam—
desired;	
naḥ—
our;	
rājyam
—
kingdom;	
bhogāḥ—
material	enjoyment;	
sukhāni—
all	happiness;	
ca	—
also;
te—
all	of	them;	
ime—
these;	
avasthitāḥ—
situated;	
yuddhe—
in	this	battlefield;
prāṇān—
lives;	
tyaktvā—
giving	up;	
dhanāni—
riches;	
ca—
also;	
ācāryāḥ
—
teachers;	
pitaraḥ—
fathers;	
putrāḥ—
sons;	
tathā—
as	well	as;	
eva—	
certainly;
ca—
also;	
pitāmahāḥ—
grandfathers;	
mātulāḥ—
maternal	uncles;	
śvaśurāḥ
—
fathers-in-law;	
pautrāḥ—
grandsons;	
śyālāḥ—
brothers-in-law;
sambandhinaḥ—
relatives;	
tathā—
as	well	as;	
etān—
all	these;	
na—
never;
hantum—	
for	killing;	
icchāmi—
do	I	wish;	
ghnataḥ—
being	killed;	
api—
even;
madhusūdana—
O	killer	of	the	demon	Madhu	(Kṛṣṇa);	
api—
even	if;	
trailokya
—
of	the	three	worlds;	
rājyasya—
of	the	kingdoms;	
hetoḥ—
in	exchange;	
kim
—
what	to	speak	of;	
nu—
only;	
mahī-kṛte—
for	the	sake	of	earth;	
nihatya—
by
killing;	
dhārtarāṣṭrān—
the	sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra;	
naḥ—
our;	
kā—
what;	
prītiḥ—
pleasure;	
syāt—
will	there	be;	
janārdana—
O	maintainer	of	all	living	entities.
TRANSLATION
O	Govinda,	of	what	avail	to	us	are	kingdoms,	happiness	or	even	life
itself	when	all	those	for	whom	we	may	desire	them	are	now	arrayed	in
this	battlefield?	O	Madhusūdana,	when	teachers,	fathers,	sons,
grandfathers,	maternal	uncles,	fathers-in-law,	grandsons,	brothers-in-law
and	all	relatives	are	ready	to	give	up	their	lives	and	properties	and	are
standing	before	me,	then	why	should	I	wish	to	kill	them,	though	I	may
survive?	O	maintainer	of	all	creatures,	I	am	not	prepared	to	fight	with
them	even	in	exchange	for	the	three	worlds,	let	alone	this	earth.
PURPORT
Arjuna	has	addressed	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	as	Govinda	because	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	object	of
all	pleasures	for	cows	and	the	senses.	By	using	this	significant	word,	Arjuna
indicates	what	will	satisfy	his	senses.	Although	Govinda	is	not	meant	for
satisfying	our	senses,	if	we	try	to	satisfy	the	senses	of	Govinda	thenautomatically	our	own	senses	are	satisfied.	Materially,	everyone	wants	to
satisfy	his	senses,	and	he	wants	God	to	be	the	order	supplier	for	such
satisfaction.	The	Lord	will	satisfy	the	senses	of	the	living	entities	as	much	as
they	deserve,	but	not	to	the	extent	that	they	may	covet.	But	when	one	takes	the
opposite	way–namely,	when	one	tries	to	satisfy	the	senses	of	Govinda	without
desiring	to	satisfy	one's	own	senses–then	by	the	grace	of	Govinda	all	desires
of	the	living	entity	are	satisfied.	Arjuna's	deep	affection	for	community	and
family	members	is	exhibited	here	partly	due	to	his	natural	compassion	for
them.	He	is	therefore	not	prepared	to	fight.	Everyone	wants	to	show	his
opulence	to	friends	and	relatives,	but	Arjuna	fears	that	all	his	relatives	and
friends	will	be	killed	in	the	battlefield,	and	he	will	be	unable	to	share	his
opulence	after	victory.	This	is	a	typical	calculation	of	material	life.	The
transcendental	life	is,	however,	different.	Since	a	devotee	wants	to	satisfy	the
desires	of	the	Lord,	he	can,	Lord	willing,	accept	all	kinds	of	opulence	for	the
service	of	the	Lord,	and	if	the	Lord	is	not	willing,	he	should	not	accept	a
farthing.	Arjuna	did	not	want	to	kill	his	relatives,	and	if	there	were	any	need	to
kill	them,	he	desired	that	Kṛṣṇa	kill	them	personally.	At	this	point	he	did	not
know	that	Kṛṣṇa	had	already	killed	them	before	their	coming	into	the
battlefield	and	that	he	was	only	to	become	an	instrument	for	Kṛṣṇa.	This	fact
is	disclosed	in	following	chapters.	As	a	natural	devotee	of	the	Lord,	Arjuna
did	not	like	to	retaliate	against	his	miscreant	cousins	and	brothers,	but	it	was
the	Lord's	plan	that	they	should	all	be	killed.	The	devotee	of	the	Lord	does	not
retaliate	against	the	wrongdoer,	but	the	Lord	does	not	tolerate	any	mischief
done	to	the	devotee	by	the	miscreants.	The	Lord	can	excuse	a	person	on	His
own	account,	but	He	excuses	no	one	who	has	done	harm	to	His	devotees.
Therefore	the	Lord	was	determined	to	kill	the	miscreants,	although	Arjuna
wanted	to	excuse	them.
TEXT	36
प ा प म े व ा श ् र य े द ᇿ म ा ᇳ ह ᇰ व ै त ा न ा त त ा ि य न ः
	
।
त ᇿ म ा ᇳ न ा ह ा ᆼ
	
व य ं
	
ह ᇳ त ु ं
	
ध ा त ᆼ र ा ᇾ ट ् र ा ᇳ ᇿ व ब ा ᇳ ध व ा न ्
	
।
ᇿ व ज न ं
	
ि ह
	
क थ ं
	
ह ᇰ व ा
	
स ु ि ख न ः
	
ᇿ य ा म
	
म ा ध व
	
॥
३ ६
॥
pāpam	evāśrayed	asmān
hatvaitān	ātatāyinaḥ
tasmān	nārhā	vayaṁ	hantuṁ
dhārtarāṣṭrān	svabāndhavānsvajanaṁ	hi	kathaṁ	hatvā
sukhinaḥ	syāma	mādhava
pāpam—
vices;	
eva—
certainly;	
āśrayet—
must	take	upon;	
asmān—
us;
	hatvā
—by	killing;	
etān—
all	these;	
ātatāyinaḥ—
aggressors;	
tasmāt—
therefore;	
na—
never;	
arhāḥ—
deserving;	
vayam—
us;
	hantum—
to	kill;	
dhārtarāṣṭrān—
the
sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra;
	svabāndhavān—
along	with	friends;	
svajanam—
kinsmen;
hi—
certainly;	
katham—
how;	
hatvā—
by	killing;	
sukhinaḥ—
happy;	
syāma—
become;	
mādhava
—O	Kṛṣṇa,	husband	of	the	goddess	of	fortune.
TRANSLATION
Sin	will	overcome	us	if	we	slay	such	aggressors.	Therefore	it	is	not
proper	for	us	to	kill	the	sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra	and	our	friends.	What	should
we	gain,	O	Kṛṣṇa,	husband	of	the	goddess	of	fortune,	and	how	could	we
be	happy	by	killing	our	own	kinsmen?
PURPORT
According	to	Vedic	injunctions	there	are	six	kinds	of	aggressors:	1)	a
poison	giver,	2)	one	who	sets	fire	to	the	house,	3)	one	who	attacks	with	deadly
weapons,	4)	one	who	plunders	riches,	5)	one	who	occupies	another's	land,	and
6)	one	who	kidnaps	a	wife.	Such	aggressors	are	at	once	to	be	killed,	and	no	sin
is	incurred	by	killing	such	aggressors.	Such	killing	of	aggressors	is	quite
befitting	for	any	ordinary	man,	but	Arjuna	was	not	an	ordinary	person.	He	was
saintly	by	character,	and	therefore	he	wanted	to	deal	with	them	in	saintliness.
This	kind	of	saintliness,	however,	is	not	for	a	
kṣatriya.	
Although	a	responsible
man	in	the	administration	of	a	state	is	required	to	be	saintly,	he	should	not	be
cowardly.	For	example,	Lord	Rāma	was	so	saintly	that	people	were	anxious	to
live	in	His	kingdom,	
(Rāma-rājya),	
but	Lord	Rāma	never	showed	any
cowardice.	Rāvaṇa	was	an	aggressor	against	Rāma	because	he	kidnapped
Rāma's	wife,	Sītā,	but	Lord	Rāma	gave	him	sufficient	lessons,	unparalleled	in
the	history	of	the	world.	In	Arjuna's	case,	however,	one	should	consider	the
special	type	of	aggressors,	namely	his	own	grandfather,	own	teacher,	friends,
sons,	grandsons,	etc.	Because	of	them,	Arjuna	thought	that	he	should	not	take
the	severe	steps	necessary	against	ordinary	aggressors.	Besides	that,	saintly
persons	are	advised	to	forgive.	Such	injunctions	for	saintly	persons	are	moreimportant	than	any	political	emergency.	Arjuna	considered	that	rather	than	kill
his	own	kinsmen	for	political	reasons,	it	would	be	better	to	forgive	them	on
grounds	of	religion	and	saintly	behavior.	He	did	not,	therefore,	consider	such
killing	profitable	simply	for	the	matter	of	temporary	bodily	happiness.	After
all,	kingdoms	and	pleasures	derived	therefrom	are	not	permanent,	so	why
should	he	risk	his	life	and	eternal	salvation	by	killing	his	own	kinsmen?
Arjuna's	addressing	of	Kṛṣṇa	as	"Mādhava,"	or	the	husband	of	the	goddess	of
fortune,	is	also	significant	in	this	connection.	He	wanted	to	point	out	to	Kṛṣṇa
that,	as	husband	of	the	goddess	of	fortune,	He	should	not	have	to	induce
Arjuna	to	take	up	a	matter	which	would	ultimately	bring	about	misfortune.
Kṛṣṇa,	however,	never	brings	misfortune	to	anyone,	to	say	nothing	of	His
devotees.
TEXTS	37-38
य ሱ ᇴ य े त े
	
न
	
प ᇽ य ि ᇳ त
	
ल ो भ ो प ह त च े त स ः
	
।
क ु ल ᇤ य क ृ त ं
	
द ो ष ं
	
ि म त ् र द ् र ो ह े
	
च
	
प ा त क म ्
	
॥
३ ७
॥
क थ ं
	
न
	
ᇥ े य म ᇿ म ा ि भ ः
	
प ा प ा द ᇿ म ा ि ᇳ न व ि त ᆼ त ु म ्
	
।
क ु ल ᇤ य क ृ त ं
	
द ो ष ं
	
प ् र प ᇽ य द ् ि भ ज ᆼ न ा द ᆼ न
	
॥
३ ८
॥
yadyapy	ete	na	paśyanti
lobhopahata-cetasaḥ
kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ	doṣaṁ
mitra-drohe	ca	pātakam
kathaṁ	na	jñeyam	asmābhiḥ
pāpād	asmān	nivartitum
kula-kṣaya-kṛtaṁ	doṣaṁ
prapaśyadbhir	janārdana
yadi—
if;	
api—
certainly;	
ete—
they;	
na—
do	not;	
paśyanti—
see;	
lobha—
greed;	
upahata—
overpowered;	
cetasaḥ—
the	hearts;	
kula-kṣaya—
in	killing	the
family;	
kṛtam—
done;	
doṣam—
fault;	
mitra-drohe—
quarreling	with	friends;	
ca
—
also;	
pātakam—
sinful	reactions;	
katham—
why;	
na—
shall	not;	
jñeyam—
know	this;	
asmābhiḥ—
by	us;	
pāpāt—
from	sins;	
asmāt—
ourselves;	
nivartitum
—
to	cease;	
kula-kṣaya—
the	destruction	of	a	dynasty;	
kṛtam—
by	so	doing;
doṣam—
crime;
	prapaśyadbhiḥ—
by	those	who	can	see;	
janārdana—
O	Kṛṣṇa.TRANSLATION
O	Janārdana,	although	these	men,	overtaken	by	greed,	see	no	fault	in
killing	one's	family	or	quarreling	with	friends,	why	should	we,	with
knowledge	of	the	sin,	engage	in	these	acts?
PURPORT
A	
kṣatriya	
is	not	supposed	to	refuse	to	battle	or	gamble	when	he	is	so
invited	by	some	rival	party.	Under	such	obligation,	Arjuna	could	not	refuse	to
fight	because	he	was	challenged	by	the	party	of	Duryodhana.	In	this
connection,	Arjuna	considered	that	the	other	party	might	be	blind	to	the
effects	of	such	a	challenge.	Arjuna,	however,	could	see	the	evil	consequences
and	could	not	accept	the	challenge.	Obligation	is	actually	binding	when	the
effect	is	good,	but	when	the	effect	is	otherwise,	then	no	one	can	be	bound.
Considering	all	these	pros	and	cons,	Arjuna	decided	not	to	fight.
TEXT	39
क ु ल ᇤ य े
	
प ् र ण ᇽ य ि ᇳ त
	
क ु ल ध म ा ᆼ ः
	
स न ा त न ा ः
	
।
ध म ᆹ
	
न ᇾ ट े
	
क ु ल ं
	
क ृ ᇰ ᇿ न म ध म ो ᆼ ऽ ि भ भ व ᇰ य ु त
	
॥
३ ९
॥
kula-kṣaye	praṇaśyanti
kula-dharmāḥ	sanātanāḥ
dharme	naṣṭe	kulaṁ	kṛtsnam
adharmo	'bhibhavaty	uta
kula-kṣaye—
in	destroying	the	family;	
praṇaśyanti—
becomes	vanquished;
kula-dharmāḥ—
the	family	traditions;	
sanātanāḥ—
eternal;	
dharme—
in
religion;	
naṣṭe—
being	destroyed;	
kulam—
family;	
kṛtsnam—
wholesale;
adharmaḥ	
—irreligious;	
abhibhavati—
transforms;	
uta—
it	is	said.
TRANSLATION
With	the	destruction	of	dynasty,	the	eternal	family	tradition	isvanquished,	and	thus	the	rest	of	the	family	becomes	involved	in
irreligious	practice.
PURPORT
In	the	system	of	the	
varṇāśrama
	institution	there	are	many	principles	of
religious	traditions	to	help	members	of	the	family	grow	properly	and	attain
spiritual	values.	The	elder	members	are	responsible	for	such	purifying
processes	in	the	family,	beginning	from	birth	to	death.	But	on	the	death	of	the
elder	members,	such	family	traditions	of	purification	may	stop,	and	the
remaining	younger	family	members	may	develop	irreligious	habits	and
thereby	lose	their	chance	for	spiritual	salvation.	Therefore,	for	no	purpose
should	the	elder	members	of	the	family	be	slain.
TEXT	40
अ ध म ा ᆼ ि भ भ व ा ᇰ क ृ ᇾ ण
	
प ् र द ु ᇾ य ि ᇳ त
	
क ु ल ि ᇿ त ् र य ः
	
। ।
ᇿ त ् र ी ष ु
	
द ु ᇾ ट ा स ु
	
व ा ᇾ ण ᆹ य
	
ज ा य त े
	
व ण ᆼ स ङ ् क र ः
	
॥
४ ०
॥
adharmābhibhavāt	kṛṣṇa
praduṣyanti	kula-striyaḥ
strīṣu	duṣṭāsu	vārṣṇeya
jāyate	varṇa-saṅkaraḥ
adharma—
irreligion;	
abhibhavāt—
having	been	predominant;	
kṛṣṇa—	
O
Kṛṣṇa;	
praduṣyanti—
become	polluted;	
kula-striyaḥ—
family	ladies;	
strīṣu	
—of
the	womanhood;	
duṣṭāsu—
being	so	polluted;	
vārṣṇeya
—O	descendant	of
Vṛṣṇi;	
jāyate—
it	so	becomes;	
varṇa-saṅkaraḥ—
unwanted	progeny.
TRANSLATION
When	irreligion	is	prominent	in	the	family,	O	Kṛṣṇa,	the	women	of	the
family	become	corrupt,	and	from	the	degradation	of	womanhood,	O
descendant	of	Vṛṣṇi,	comes	unwanted	progeny.
PURPORTGood	population	in	human	society	is	the	basic	principle	for	peace,
prosperity	and	spiritual	progress	in	life.	The	
varṇāśrama	
religion's	principles
were	so	designed	that	the	good	population	would	prevail	in	society	for	the
general	spiritual	progress	of	state	and	community.	Such	population	depends	on
the	chastity	and	faithfulness	of	its	womanhood.	As	children	are	very	prone	to
be	misled,	women	are	similarly	very	prone	to	degradation.	Therefore,	both
children	and	women	require	protection	by	the	elder	members	of	the	family.	By
being	engaged	in	various	religious	practices,	women	will	not	be	misled	into
adultery.	According	to	Cāṇakya	Paṇḍit,	women	are	generally	not	very
intelligent	and	therefore	not	trustworthy.	So,	the	different	family	traditions	of
religious	activities	should	always	engage	them,	and	thus	their	chastity	and
devotion	will	give	birth	to	a	good	population	eligible	for	participating	in	the
varṇāśrama	
system.	On	the	failure	of	such	
varṇāśrama-dharma,	
naturally	the
women	become	free	to	act	and	mix	with	men,	and	thus	adultery	is	indulged	in
at	the	risk	of	unwanted	population.	Irresponsible	men	also	provoke	adultery	in
society,	and	thus	unwanted	children	flood	the	human	race	at	the	risk	of	war
and	pestilence.
TEXT	41
स ङ ् क र ो
	
न र क ा य ै व
	
क ु ल ᇪ न ा न ा ं
	
क ु ल ᇿ य
	
च
	
। ।
प त ि ᇳ त
	
ि प त र ो
	
ቋ े ष ा ं
	
ल ु ᇴ त ि प ᇯ ड ो द क ि क ् र य ा ः
	
॥
४ १
॥
saṅkaro	narakāyaiva
kula-ghnānāṁ	kulasya	ca
patanti	pitaro	hy	eṣāṁ
lupta-piṇḍodaka-kriyāḥ
saṅkaraḥ—
such	unwanted	children;	
narakāya—
for	hellish	life;	
eva—
certainly;	
kula-ghnānām—
of	those	who	are	killers	of	the	family;	
kulasya—	
of
the	family;	
ca—
also;	
patanti—
fall	down;	
pitaraḥ—
forefathers;	
hi—	
certainly;
eṣām—
of	them;	
lupta—
stopped;	
piṇḍa—
offerings;	
udaka—
water;	
kriyāḥ—
performance.
TRANSLATIONWhen	there	is	increase	of	unwanted	population,	a	hellish	situation	is
created	both	for	the	family	and	for	those	who	destroy	the	family	tradition.
In	such	corrupt	families,	there	is	no	offering	of	oblations	of	food	and
water	to	the	ancestors.
PURPORT
According	to	the	rules	and	regulations	of	fruitive	activities,	there	is	a	need
to	offer	periodical	food	and	water	to	the	forefathers	of	the	family.	This
offering	is	performed	by	worship	of	Viṣṇu,	because	eating	the	remnants	of
food	offered	to	Viṣṇu	can	deliver	one	from	all	kinds	of	sinful	actions.
Sometimes	the	forefathers	may	be	suffering	from	various	types	of	sinful
reactions,	and	sometimes	some	of	them	cannot	even	acquire	a	gross	material
body	and	are	forced	to	remain	in	subtle	bodies	as	ghosts.	Thus,	when	remnants
of	
prasādam	
food	are	offered	to	forefathers	by	descendants,	the	forefathers	are
released	from	ghostly	or	other	kinds	of	miserable	life.	Such	help	rendered	to
forefathers	is	a	family	tradition,	and	those	who	are	not	in	devotional	life	are
required	to	perform	such	rituals.	One	who	is	engaged	in	the	devotional	life	is
not	required	to	perform	such	actions.	Simply	by	performing	devotional
service,	one	can	deliver	hundreds	and	thousands	of	forefathers	from	all	kinds
of	misery.	It	is	stated	in	the	
Bhāgavatam:
devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ	pitṝṇāṁ
na	kiṅkaro	nāyamṛṇī	ca	rājan
sarvātmanā	yaḥ	śaraṇaṁ	śaraṇyaṁ
gato	mukundaṁ	parihṛtya	kartam
"Anyone	who	has	taken	shelter	of	the	lotus	feet	of	Mukunda,	the	giver	of
liberation,	giving	up	all	kinds	of	obligation,	and	has	taken	to	the	path	in	all
seriousness,	owes	neither	duties	nor	obligations	to	the	demigods,	sages,
general	living	entities,	family	members,	humankind	or	forefathers."	(
Bhāg
.
11.5.41)	Such	obligations	are	automatically	fulfilled	by	performance	of
devotional	service	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.
TEXT	42
द ो ष ै र े त ै ः
	
क ु ल ᇪ न ा न ा ं
	
व ण ᆼ स ङ ् क र क ा र क ै ः
	
। ।
उ ᇰ स ा ሱ ᇳ त े
	
ज ा ि त ध म ा ᆼ ः
	
क ु ल ध म ा ᆼ ᇽ च
	
श ा ᇽ व त ा ः
	
॥
४ २
॥doṣair	etaiḥ	kula-ghnānāṁ
varṇa-saṅkara-kārakaiḥ
utsādyante	jāti-dharmāḥ
kula-dharmāś	ca	śāśvatāḥ
doṣaiḥ—
by	such	faults;	
etaiḥ—
all	these;	
kula-ghnānām—
of	the	destroyer	of
a	family;	
varṇa-saṅkara—
unwanted	children;	
kārakaiḥ—
by	the	doers;
utsādyante—
causes	devastation;	
jāti-dharmāḥ—
community	project;	
kula-
dharmāḥ—
family	tradition;	
ca—
also;	
śāśvatāḥ—
eternal.
TRANSLATION
Due	to	the	evil	deeds	of	the	destroyers	of	family	tradition,	all	kinds	of
community	projects	and	family	welfare	activities	are	devastated.
PURPORT
The	four	orders	of	human	society,	combined	with	family	welfare	activities
as	they	are	set	forth	by	the	institution	of	the	
sanātana-dharma	
or	
varṇāśrama-
dharma,	
are	designed	to	enable	the	human	being	to	attain	his	ultimate
salvation.	Therefore,	the	breaking	of	the	
sanātana-dharma	
tradition	by
irresponsible	leaders	of	society	brings	about	chaos	in	that	society,	and
consequently	people	forget	the	aim	of	life—Viṣṇu.	Such	leaders	are	called
blind,	and	persons	who	follow	such	leaders	are	sure	to	be	led	into	chaos.
TEXT	43
उ ᇰ स ᇳ न क ु ल ध म ा ᆼ ण ा ं
	
म न ु ᇾ य ा ण ा ं
	
ज न ा द ᆼ न
	
।
न र क े
	
ि न य त ं
	
व ा स ो
	
भ व त ी ᇰ य न ु श ु श ् ኄ म
	
॥
४ ३
॥
utsanna-kula-dharmāṇāṁ
manuṣyāṇāṁ	janārdana
narake	niyataṁ	vāso
bhavatīty	anuśuśruma
utsanna—
spoiled;	
kula-dharmāṇām—
of	those	who	have	the	familytraditions;	
manuṣyāṇām—
of	such	men;	
janārdana
—O	Kṛṣṇa;	
narake—
in	hell;
niyatam—
always;	
vāsaḥ—
residence;	
bhavati—
it	so	becomes;	
iti—
thus;
anuśuśruma—
I	have	heard	by	disciplic	succession.
TRANSLATION
O	Kṛṣṇa,	maintainer	of	the	people,	I	have	heard	by	disciplic	succession
that	those	who	destroy	family	traditions	dwell	always	in	hell.
PURPORT
Arjuna	bases	his	argument	not	on	his	own	personal	experience,	but	on	what
he	has	heard	from	the	authorities.	That	is	the	way	of	receiving	real	knowledge.
One	cannot	reach	the	real	point	of	factual	knowledge	without	being	helped	by
the	right	person	who	is	already	established	in	that	knowledge.	There	is	a
system	in	the	
varṇāśrama	
institution	by	which	one	has	to	undergo	the	process
of	ablution	before	death	for	his	sinful	activities.	One	who	is	always	engaged	in
sinful	activities	must	utilize	the	process	of	ablution	called	the	
prāyaścitta.
Without	doing	so,	one	surely	will	be	transferred	to	hellish	planets	to	undergo
miserable	lives	as	the	result	of	sinful	activities.
TEXT	44
अ ह ो
	
ब त
	
म ह ᇰ प ा प ं
	
क त ु ᆾ
	
ᇼ य व ि स त ा
	
व य म ्
	
।
य द ् र ा ᇬ य स ु ख ल ो भ े न
	
ह ᇳ त ु ं
	
ᇿ व ज न म ु ሱ त ा ः
	
॥
४ ४
॥
aho	bata	mahat	pāpaṁ
kartuṁ	vyavasitā	vayam
yad	rājya-sukha-lobhena
hantuṁ	svajanam	udyatāḥ
ahaḥ—
alas;	
bata—
how	strange	it	is;	
mahat—
great;	
pāpam—
sins;	
kartum—
to	perform;	
vyavasitāḥ—
decided;	
vayam—
we;	
yat—
so	that;	
rājya—
kingdom;
sukha-lobhena—
driven	by	greed	for	royal	happiness;	
hantum—
to	kill;
svajanam—
kinsmen;	
udyatāḥ—
trying	for.TRANSLATION
Alas,	how	strange	it	is	that	we	are	preparing	to	commit	greatly	sinful
acts,	driven	by	the	desire	to	enjoy	royal	happiness.
PURPORT
Driven	by	selfish	motives,	one	may	be	inclined	to	such	sinful	acts	as	the
killing	of	one's	own	brother,	father,	or	mother.	There	are	many	such	instances
in	the	history	of	the	world.	But	Arjuna,	being	a	saintly	devotee	of	the	Lord,	is
always	conscious	of	moral	principles	and	therefore	takes	care	to	avoid	such
activities.
TEXT	45
य ि द
	
म ा म प ् र त ी क ा र म श ᇿ त ् र ं
	
श ᇿ त ् र प ा ण य ः
	
।
ध ा त ᆼ र ा ᇾ ट ् र ा
	
र ण े
	
ह ᇳ य ु ᇿ त ᇳ म े
	
ᇤ े म त र ं
	
भ व े त ्
	
॥
४ ५
॥
yadi	mām	apratīkāram
aśastraṁ	śastra-pāṇayaḥ
dhārtarāṣṭrā	raṇe	hanyus
tan	me	kṣemataraṁ	bhavet
yadi—
even	if;	
mām—
unto	me;	
apratīkāram—
without	being	resistant;
aśastram—
without	being	fully	equipped;	
śastra-pāṇayaḥ—
those	with
weapons	in	hand;	
dhārtarāṣṭrāḥ—
the	sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra;	
raṇe—
in	the
battlefield;	
hanyuḥ—
may	kill;	
tat—
that;	
me—
mine;	
kṣemataram—
better;
bhavet—	
become.
TRANSLATION
I	would	consider	it	better	for	the	sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra	to	kill	me
unarmed	and	unresisting,	rather	than	fight	with	them.PURPORT
It	is	the	custom–according	to	
kṣatriya	
fighting	principles–that	an	unarmed
and	unwilling	foe	should	not	be	attacked.	Arjuna,	however,	in	such	an
enigmatic	position,	decided	he	would	not	fight	if	he	were	attacked	by	the
enemy.	He	did	not	consider	how	much	the	other	party	was	bent	upon	fighting.
All	these	symptoms	are	due	to	softheartedness	resulting	from	his	being	a	great
devotee	of	the	Lord.
TEXT	46
स ᇮ ज य
	
उ व ा च
	
। ।
ए व म ु ᇧ ᇰ व ा ज ु ᆼ न ः
	
स ङ ् ᇨ य े
	
र थ ो प ᇿ थ
	
उ प ा ि व श त ्
	
। ।
ि व स ृ ᇬ य
	
स श र ं
	
च ा प ं
	
श ो क स ं ि व ᇩ न म ा न स ः
	
॥
४ ६
॥
sañjaya	uvāca
evam	uktvārjunaḥ	saṅkhye
rathopastha	upāviśat
visṛjya	sa-śaraṁ	cāpaṁ
śoka-saṁvigna-mānasaḥ
sañjayaḥ—
Sañjaya;	
uvāca—
said;	
evam—
thus;	
uktvā—
saying;	
arjunaḥ—
Arjuna;	
saṅkhye—
in	the	battlefield;	
ratha—
chariot;	
upasthaḥ—
situated	on;
upāviśat—
sat	down	again;	
visṛjya—
keeping	aside;	
sa-śaram—
along	with
arrows;	
cāpam—
the	bow;	
śoka—
lamentation;	
saṁvigna—
distressed;	
mānasaḥ
—
within	the	mind.
TRANSLATION
Sañjaya	said:	Arjuna,	having	thus	spoken	on	the	battlefield,	cast	aside
his	bow	and	arrows	and	sat	down	on	the	chariot,	his	mind	overwhelmed
with	grief.
PURPORTWhile	observing	the	situation	of	his	enemy,	Arjuna	stood	up	on	the	chariot,
but	he	was	so	afflicted	with	lamentation	that	he	sat	down	again,	setting	aside
his	bow	and	arrows.	Such	a	kind	and	softhearted	person,	in	the	devotional
service	of	the	Lord,	is	fit	to	receive	self-knowledge.
Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	First	Chapter	of	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhagavad-gītā
	in	the	matter	of	Observing	the	Armies	on	the	Battlefield	of
Kurukṣetra.Chapter-2
CHAPTER	TWO
Contents	of	the	Gītā	Summarized
TEXT	1
स ᇮ ज य
	
उ व ा च
	
।
त ं
	
त थ ा
	
क ृ प य ा ि व ᇾ ट म श ् ኄ प ू ण ा ᆼ क ु ल े ᇤ ण म ्
	
।
ि व ष ी द ᇳ त ि म द ं
	
व ा ᇧ य म ु व ा च
	
म ध ु स ू द न ः
	
॥
१
॥
sañjaya	uvāca
taṁ	tathā	kṛpayāviṣṭam
aśru-pūrṇākulekṣaṇam
viṣīdantam	idaṁ	vākyamuvāca	madhusūdanaḥ
sañjayaḥ	uvāca—
Sañjaya	said;	
tam—
unto	Arjuna;	
tathā—
thus;	
kṛpayā—	
by
compassion;	
āviṣṭam—
overwhelmed;	
aśru-pūrṇa—
full	of	tears;	
ākula—
depressed;	
īkṣaṇam—
eyes;	
viṣīdantam—
lamenting;	
idam—
this;	
vākyam
—
words;	
uvāca—
said;	
madhusūdanaḥ—
the	killer	of	Madhu.
TRANSLATION
Sañjaya	said:	Seeing	Arjuna	full	of	compassion	and	very	sorrowful,	his
eyes	brimming	with	tears,	Madhusūdana,	Kṛṣṇa,	spoke	the	following
words.
PURPORT
Material	compassion,	lamentation	and	tears	are	all	signs	of	ignorance	of	the
real	self.	Compassion	for	the	eternal	soul	is	self-realization.	The	word
"Madhusūdana"	is	significant	in	this	verse.	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	killed	the	demon
Madhu,	and	now	Arjuna	wanted	Kṛṣṇa	to	kill	the	demon	of	misunderstanding
that	had	overtaken	him	in	the	discharge	of	his	duty.	No	one	knows	where
compassion	should	be	applied.	Compassion	for	the	dress	of	a	drowning	man	is
senseless.	A	man	fallen	in	the	ocean	of	nescience	cannot	be	saved	simply	by
rescuing	his	outward	dress–the	gross	material	body.	One	who	does	not	know
this	and	laments	for	the	outward	dress	is	called	a	
śūdra,	
or	one	who	laments
unnecessarily.	Arjuna	was	a	
kṣatriya,	
and	this	conduct	was	not	expected	from
him.	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	however,	can	dissipate	the	lamentation	of	the	ignorant	man,
and	for	this	purpose	the	
Bhagavad-	gītā	
was	sung	by	Him.	This	chapter
instructs	us	in	self-realization	by	an	analytical	study	of	the	material	body	and
the	spirit	soul,	as	explained	by	the	supreme	authority,	Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.	This
realization	is	made	possible	by	working	with	the	fruitive	being	situated	in	the
fixed	conception	of	the	real	self.
TEXT	2
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
क ु त ᇿ ᇰ व ा
	
क ᇽ म ल ि म द ं
	
ि व ष म े
	
स म ु प ि ᇿ थ त म ्
	
।अ न ा य ᆼ ज ु ᇾ ट म ᇿ व ᇩ य ᆼ म क ी ि त ᆼ क र म ज ु ᆼ न
	
॥
२
॥
śrī-bhagavān	uvāca
kutas	tvā	kaśmalam	idaṁ
viṣame	samupasthitam
anārya-juṣṭam	asvargyam
akīrti-karam	arjuna
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
kutaḥ—
wherefrom;	
tvā—
unto	you;	
kaśmalam—
dirtiness;	
idam—
this	lamentation;
viṣame—
this	hour	of	crisis;	
samupasthitam—
arrived;	
anārya—
persons	who	do
not	know	the	value	of	life;	
juṣṭam—
practiced	by;	
asvargyam—
that	which	does
not	lead	to	higher	planets;	
akīrti—
infamy;	
karam—
the	cause	of;	
arjuna—
O
Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
The	Supreme	Person	[Bhagavān]	said:	My	dear	Arjuna,	how	have
these	impurities	come	upon	you?	They	are	not	at	all	befitting	a	man	who
knows	the	progressive	values	of	life.	They	do	not	lead	to	higher	planets,
but	to	infamy.
PURPORT
Kṛṣṇa	and	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	are	identical.	Therefore
Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	referred	to	as	"Bhagavān"	throughout	the	
Gītā
.	Bhagavān	is	the
ultimate	in	the	Absolute	Truth.	Absolute	Truth	is	realized	in	three	phases	of
understanding,	namely	Brahman	or	the	impersonal	all-pervasive	spirit;
Paramātmā,	or	the	localized	aspect	of	the	Supreme	within	the	heart	of	all
living	entities;	and	Bhagavān,	or	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Lord
Kṛṣṇa.	In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
this	conception	of	the	Absolute	Truth	is
explained	thus:
vadanti	tat	tattva-vidas	tattvaṁ	yaj	jñānam	advayam
brahmeti	paramātmeti	bhagavān	iti	śabdyate.
"The	Absolute	Truth	is	realized	in	three	phases	of	understanding	by	theknower	of	the	Absolute	Truth,	and	all	of	them	are	identical.	Such	phases	of	the
Absolute	Truth	are	expressed	as	Brahman,	Paramātmā,	and	Bhagavān."	(
Bhāg.
1.2.11)	These	three	divine	aspects	can	be	explained	by	the	example	of	the	sun,
which	also	has	three	different	aspects,	namely	the	sunshine,	the	sun's	surface
and	the	sun	planet	itself.	One	who	studies	the	sunshine	only	is	the	preliminary
student.	One	who	understands	the	sun's	surface	is	further	advanced.	And	one
who	can	enter	into	the	sun	planet	is	the	highest.	Ordinary	students	who	are
satisfied	by	simply	understanding	the	sunshine-its	universal	pervasiveness	and
the	glaring	effulgence	of	its	impersonal	nature-may	be	compared	to	those	who
can	realize	only	the	Brahman	feature	of	the	Absolute	Truth.	The	student	who
has	advanced	still	further	can	know	the	sun	disc,	which	is	compared	to
knowledge	of	the	Paramātmā	feature	of	the	Absolute	Truth.	And	the	student
who	can	enter	into	the	heart	of	the	sun	planet	is	compared	to	those	who	realize
the	personal	features	of	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth.	Therefore,	the	
bhaktas,
or	the	transcendentalists	who	have	realized	the	Bhagavān	feature	of	the
Absolute	Truth,	are	the	topmost	transcendentalists,	although	all	students	who
are	engaged	in	the	study	of	the	Absolute	Truth	are	engaged	in	the	same	subject
matter.	The	sunshine,	the	sun	disc	and	the	inner	affairs	of	the	sun	planet
cannot	be	separated	from	one	another,	and	yet	the	students	of	the	three
different	phases	are	not	in	the	same	category.
The	Sanskrit	word	
Bhagavān
	is	explained	by	the	great	authority,	Parāśara
Muni,	the	father	of	Vyāsadeva.	The	Supreme	Personality	who	possesses	all
riches,	all	strength,	all	fame,	all	beauty,	all	knowledge	and	all	renunciation	is
called	Bhagavān.	There	are	many	persons	who	are	very	rich,	very	powerful,
very	beautiful,	very	famous,	very	learned,	and	very	much	detached,	but	no	one
can	claim	that	he	possesses	all	riches,	all	strength,	etc.,	entirely.	Only	Kṛṣṇa
can	claim	this	because	He	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	No	living
entity,	including	Brahmā,	Lord	Śiva,	or	Nārāyaṇa,	can	possess	opulences	as
fully	as	Kṛṣṇa.	Therefore	it	is	concluded	in	the	
Brahma-saṁhitā	
by	Lord
Brahmā	himself	that	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	No
one	is	equal	to	or	above	Him.	He	is	the	primeval	Lord,	or	Bhagavān,	known	as
Govinda,	and	He	is	the	supreme	cause	of	all	causes.
īśvaraḥ	paramaḥ	kṛṣṇaḥ	sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ
anādir	ādir	govindaḥ	sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam
"There	are	many	personalities	possessing	the	qualities	of	Bhagavān,	but	Kṛṣṇa
is	the	supreme	because	none	can	excel	Him.	He	is	the	Supreme	Person,	andHis	body	is	eternal,	full	of	knowledge	and	bliss.	He	is	the	primeval	Lord
Govinda	and	the	cause	of	all	causes."	
(Brahma-	saṁhitā	
5.1)
In	the	
Bhāgavatam	
also	there	is	a	list	of	many	incarnations	of	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	but	Kṛṣṇa	is	described	as	the	original	Personality	of
Godhead,	from	whom	many,	many	incarnations	and	Personalities	of	Godhead
expand:
ete	cāṁśa-kalāḥ	puṁsaḥ	kṛṣṇas	tu	bhagavān	svayam
indrāri-vyākulaṁ	lokaṁ	mṛḍayanti	yuge	yuge
"All	the	lists	of	the	incarnations	of	Godhead	submitted	herewith	are	either
plenary	expansions	or	parts	of	the	plenary	expansions	of	the	Supreme
Godhead,	but	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	Himself."	(Bhāg.
1.3.28)
Therefore,	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	original	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	the
Absolute	Truth,	the	source	of	both	the	Supersoul	and	the	impersonal	Brahman.
In	the	presence	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Arjuna's
lamentation	for	his	kinsmen	is	certainly	unbecoming,	and	therefore	Kṛṣṇa
expressed	His	surprise	with	the	word	
kutas,	
"wherefrom."	Such	unmanly
sentiments	were	never	expected	from	a	person	belonging	to	the	civilized	class
of	men	known	as	
Āryans.	
The	word	
āryan
	is	applicable	to	persons	who	know
the	value	of	life	and	have	a	civilization	based	on	spiritual	realization.	Persons
who	are	led	by	the	material	conception	of	life	do	not	know	that	the	aim	of	life
is	realization	of	the	Absolute	Truth,	Viṣṇu,	or	Bhagavān,	and	they	are
captivated	by	the	external	features	of	the	material	world,	and	therefore	they	do
not	know	what	liberation	is.	Persons	who	have	no	knowledge	of	liberation
from	material	bondage	are	called	non-Āryans.	Although	Arjuna	was	a
kṣatriya,	
he	was	deviating	from	his	prescribed	duties	by	declining	to	fight.
This	act	of	cowardice	is	described	as	befitting	the	non-Āryans.	Such	deviation
from	duty	does	not	help	one	in	the	progress	of	spiritual	life,	nor	does	it	even
give	one	the	opportunity	to	become	famous	in	this	world.	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	did	not
approve	of	the	so-	called	compassion	of	Arjuna	for	his	kinsmen.
TEXT	3
ᇧ ल ै ᇶ य ं
	
म ा
	
ᇿ म
	
ग म ः
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
न ै त ᇰ ᇰ व ᇹ य ु प प ሱ त े
	
।
ᇤ ु द ् र ं
	
ᇦ द य द ौ ब ᆼ ᇺ य ं
	
ᇰ य ᇧ ᇰ व ो ि ሧ ᇾ ठ
	
प र ᇳ त प
	
॥
३
॥klaibyaṁ	mā	sma	gamaḥ	pārtha
naitat	tvayy	upapadyate
kṣudraṁ	hṛdaya-daurbalyaṁ
tyaktvottiṣṭha	parantapa
klaibyam—
impotence;	
mā—
do	not;	
sma—
take	it;	
gamaḥ—
go	in;	
pārtha—
O
son	of	Pṛthā;	
na—
never;	
etat—
like	this;	
tvayi—
unto	you;	
upapadyate—
is
befitting;	
kṣudram—
very	little;	
hṛdaya—
heart;	
daurbalyam—	
weakness;
tyaktvā—
giving	up;	
uttiṣṭha—
get	up;	
parantapa—
O	chastiser	of	the	enemies.
TRANSLATION
O	son	of	Pṛthā,	do	not	yield	to	this	degrading	impotence.	It	does	not
become	you.	Give	up	such	petty	weakness	of	heart	and	arise,	O	chastiser
of	the	enemy.
PURPORT
Arjuna	was	addressed	as	the	"son	of	Pṛthā,"	who	happened	to	be	the	sister
of	Kṛṣṇa's	father	Vasudeva.	Therefore	Arjuna	had	a	blood	relationship	with
Kṛṣṇa.	If	the	son	of	a	
kṣatriya	
declines	to	fight,	he	is	a	
kṣatriya	
in	name	only,
and	if	the	son	of	a	
brāhmaṇa	
acts	impiously,	he	is	a	
brāhmaṇa	
in	name	only.
Such	
kṣatriyas	
and	
brāhmaṇas	
are	unworthy	sons	of	their	fathers;	therefore,
Kṛṣṇa	did	not	want	Arjuna	to	become	an	unworthy	son	of	a	
kṣatriya.	
Arjuna
was	the	most	intimate	friend	of	Kṛṣṇa,	and	Kṛṣṇa	was	directly	guiding	him	on
the	chariot;	but	in	spite	of	all	these	credits,	if	Arjuna	abandoned	the	battle,	he
would	be	committing	an	infamous	act;	therefore	Kṛṣṇa	said	that	such	an
attitude	in	Arjuna	did	not	fit	his	personality.	Arjuna	might	argue	that	he	would
give	up	the	battle	on	the	grounds	of	his	magnanimous	attitude	for	the	most
respectable	Bhīṣma	and	his	relatives,	but	Kṛṣṇa	considered	that	sort	of
magnanimity	not	approved	by	authority.	Therefore,	such	magnanimity	or	so-
called	nonviolence	should	be	given	up	by	persons	like	Arjuna	under	the	direct
guidance	of	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	4अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
क थ ं
	
भ ी ᇾ म म ह ं
	
स ङ ् ᇨ य े
	
द ् र ो ण ं
	
च
	
म ध ु स ू द न
	
।
इ ष ु ि भ ः
	
प ् र ि त य ो ᇰ ᇿ य ा ि म
	
प ू ज ा ह ा ᆼ व ि र स ू द न
	
॥
४
॥
arjuna	uvāca
kathaṁ	bhīṣmam	ahaṁ	saṅkhye
droṇaṁ	ca	madhusūdana
iṣubhiḥ	pratiyotsyāmi
pūjārhāv	arisūdana
arjunaḥ	uvāca—
Arjuna	said;	
katham—
how;	
bhīṣmam—
unto	Bhīṣma;	
aham
—
I;
	saṅkhye—
in	the	fight;	
droṇam—
unto	Droṇa;	
ca—
also,	
madhusūdana
—O
killer	of	Madhu;	
iṣubhiḥ—
with	arrows;	
pratiyotsyāmi—
shall	counterattack;
pūjā-arhau—
those	who	are	worshipable;	
arisūdana—
O	killer	of	the	enemies.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	said:	O	killer	of	Madhu	[Kṛṣṇa],	how	can	I	counterattack	with
arrows	in	battle	men	like	Bhīṣma	and	Droṇa,	who	are	worthy	of	my
worship?
PURPORT
Respectable	superiors	like	Bhīṣma	the	grandfather	and	Droṇācārya	the
teacher	are	always	worshipable.	Even	if	they	attack,	they	should	not	be
counterattacked.	It	is	general	etiquette	that	superiors	are	not	to	be	offered	even
a	verbal	fight.	Even	if	they	are	sometimes	harsh	in	behavior,	they	should	not
be	harshly	treated.	Then,	how	is	it	possible	for	Arjuna	to	counterattack	them?
Would	Kṛṣṇa	ever	attack	His	own	grandfather,	Ugrasena,	or	His	teacher,
Sāndīpani	Muni?	These	were	some	of	the	arguments	by	Arjuna	to	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	5
ग ु ኅ न ह ᇰ व ा
	
ि ह
	
म ह ा न ु भ ा व ा न ्
	
श ् र े य ो
	
भ ो ᇧ त ु ं
	
भ ै ቎ य म प ी ह
	
ल ो क े
	
।
ह ᇰ व ा थ ᆼ क ा म ा ं ᇿ त ु
	
ग ु ኅ ि न ह ै व
	भ ु ᇮ ज ी य
	
भ ो ग ा न ् ኄ ि ध र प ् र ि द ᇩ ध ा न ्
	
॥
५
॥
gurūn	ahatvā	hi	mahānubhāvān
śreyo	bhoktuṁ	bhaikṣyam	apīha	loke
hatvārtha-kāmāṁs	tu	gurūn	ihaiva
bhuñjīya	bhogān	rudhira-pradigdhān
gurūn—
the	superiors;	
ahatvā—
by	killing;	
hi—
certainly;	
mahā-anubhāvān—
great	souls;	
śreyaḥ—
it	is	better;	
bhoktum—
to	enjoy	life;	
bhaikṣyam—
begging;
api—
even;	
iha—
in	this	life;	
loke—
in	this	world;	
hatvā—
killing;	
artha—
gain;
kāmān—
so	desiring;	
tu—
but;	
gurūn—
superiors;	
iha—
in	this	world;	
eva—
certainly;	
bhuñjīya—
has	to	enjoy;	
bhogān—
enjoyable	things;	
rudhira—
blood;
pradigdhān—
tainted	with.
TRANSLATION
It	is	better	to	live	in	this	world	by	begging	than	to	live	at	the	cost	of	the
lives	of	great	souls	who	are	my	teachers.	Even	though	they	are	avaricious,
they	are	nonetheless	superiors.	If	they	are	killed,	our	spoils	will	be	tainted
with	blood.
PURPORT
According	to	scriptural	codes,	a	teacher	who	engages	in	an	abominable
action	and	has	lost	his	sense	of	discrimination	is	fit	to	be	abandoned.	Bhīṣma
and	Droṇa	were	obliged	to	take	the	side	of	Duryodhana	because	of	his
financial	assistance,	although	they	should	not	have	accepted	such	a	position
simply	on	financial	considerations.	Under	the	circumstances,	they	have	lost
the	respectability	of	teachers.	But	Arjuna	thinks	that	nevertheless	they	remain
his	superiors,	and	therefore	to	enjoy	material	profits	after	killing	them	would
mean	to	enjoy	spoils	tainted	with	blood.
TEXT	6
न
	
च ै त द ् ि व द ् म ः
	
क त र ᇳ न ो
	
ग र ी य ो
	
य ሲ ा
	
ज य े म
	
य ि द
	
व ा
	
न ो
	
ज य े य ु ः
	
।य ा न े व
	
ह ᇰ व ा
	
न
	
ि ज ज ी ि व ष ा म
-	
ᇿ त े ऽ व ि ᇿ थ त ा ः
	
प ् र म ु ख े
	
ध ा त ᆼ र ा ᇾ ट ् र ा ः
	
॥
६
॥
na	caitad	vidmaḥ	kataran	no	garīyo
yad	vā	jayema	yadi	vā	no	jayeyuḥ
yān	eva	hatvā	na	jijīviṣāmas
te	'vasthitāḥ	pramukhe	dhārtarāṣṭrāḥ
na—
nor;	
ca—
also;	
etat—
this;	
vidmaḥ—
do	know;	
katarat—
which;	
naḥ—
us;
garīyaḥ—
better;	
yat—
what;	
vā—
either;	
jayema—
conquer	us;	
yadi—
if;	
vā—
or;
naḥ—
us;	
jayeyuḥ—
conquer;	
yān—
those;	
eva—
certainly;	
hatvā—
by	killing;	
na
—
never;	
jijīviṣāmaḥ—
want	to	live;	
te—
all	of	them;	
avasthitāḥ—
are	situated;
pramukhe—
in	the	front;	
dhārtarāṣṭrāḥ—
the	sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra.
TRANSLATION
Nor	do	we	know	which	is	better–conquering	them	or	being	conquered
by	them.	The	sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra,	whom	if	we	killed	we	should	not	care	to
live,	are	now	standing	before	us	on	this	battlefield.
PURPORT
Arjuna	did	not	know	whether	he	should	fight	and	risk	unnecessary	violence,
although	fighting	is	the	duty	of	the	
kṣatriyas,	
or	whether	he	should	refrain	and
live	by	begging.	If	he	did	not	conquer	the	enemy,	begging	would	be	his	only
means	of	subsistence.	Nor	was	there	certainty	of	victory,	because	either	side
might	emerge	victorious.	Even	if	victory	awaited	them	(and	their	cause	was
justified),	still,	if	the	sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra	died	in	battle,	it	would	be	very
difficult	to	live	in	their	absence.	Under	the	circumstances,	that	would	be
another	kind	of	defeat	for	them.	All	these	considerations	by	Arjuna	definitely
prove	that	he	was	not	only	a	great	devotee	of	the	Lord	but	that	he	was	also
highly	enlightened	and	had	complete	control	over	his	mind	and	senses.	His
desire	to	live	by	begging,	although	he	was	born	in	the	royal	household,	is
another	sign	of	detachment.	He	was	truly	virtuous,	as	these	qualities,
combined	with	his	faith	in	the	words	of	instruction	of	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	(his	spiritual
master),	indicate.	It	is	concluded	that	Arjuna	was	quite	fit	for	liberation.
Unless	the	senses	are	controlled,	there	is	no	chance	of	elevation	to	theplatform	of	knowledge,	and	without	knowledge	and	devotion	there	is	no
chance	of	liberation.	Arjuna	was	competent	in	all	these	attributes,	over	and
above	his	enormous	attributes	in	his	material	relationships.
TEXT	7
क ा प ᆼ ᇯ य द ो ष ो प ह त ᇿ व भ ा व ः
प ृ ᇫ छ ा ि म
	
ᇰ व ा ं
	
ध म ᆼ स ᇸ म ू ढ च े त ा ः
	
।
य ᇫ छ ् र े य ः
	
ᇿ य ा ि ᇳ न ि ᇽ च त ं
	
ब ् ኅ ि ह
	
त ᇳ म े
ि श ᇾ य ᇿ त े ऽ ह ं
	
श ा ि ध
	
म ा ं
	
ᇰ व ा ं
	
प ् र प ᇳ न म ्
	
॥
७
॥
kārpaṇya-doṣopahata-svabhāvaḥ
pṛcchāmi	tvāṁ	dharma-saṁmūḍha-cetāḥ
yac	chreyaḥ	syān	niścitaṁ	brūhi	tan	me
śiṣyas	te	'haṁ	śādhi	māṁ	tvāṁ	prapannam
kārpaṇya—
miserly;	
doṣa
—weakness;	
upahata—
being	inflicted	by;
svabhāvaḥ—
characteristics;	
pṛcchāmi—
I	am	asking;	
tvām—
unto	You;	
dharma
—	
religion;	
saṁmūḍha—
bewildered;	
cetāḥ—
in	heart;	
yat—
what;	
śreyaḥ—
all-
good;	
syāt—
may	be;	
niścitam—
confidently;	
brūhi—
tell;	
tat—
that;	
me—
unto
me;	
śiṣyaḥ—
disciple;	
te—
Your;	
aham—
I	am;	
śādhi—
just	instruct;	
mām—
me;
tvām—
unto	You;	
prapannam—
surrendered.
TRANSLATION
Now	I	am	confused	about	my	duty	and	have	lost	all	composure	because
of	weakness.	In	this	condition	I	am	asking	You	to	tell	me	clearly	what	is
best	for	me.	Now	I	am	Your	disciple,	and	a	soul	surrendered	unto	You.
Please	instruct	me.
PURPORT
By	nature's	own	way	the	complete	system	of	material	activities	is	a	source
of	perplexity	for	everyone.	In	every	step	there	is	perplexity,	and	therefore	it
behooves	one	to	approach	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master	who	can	give	one
proper	guidance	for	executing	the	purpose	of	life.	All	Vedic	literatures	adviseus	to	approach	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master	to	get	free	from	the	perplexities	of
life	which	happen	without	our	desire.	They	are	like	a	forest	fire	that	somehow
blazes	without	being	set	by	anyone.	Similarly,	the	world	situation	is	such	that
perplexities	of	life	automatically	appear,	without	our	wanting	such	confusion.
No	one	wants	fire,	and	yet	it	takes	place,	and	we	become	perplexed.	The	Vedic
wisdom	therefore	advises	that	in	order	to	solve	the	perplexities	of	life	and	to
understand	the	science	of	the	solution,	one	must	approach	a	spiritual	master
who	is	in	the	disciplic	succession.	A	person	with	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master	is
supposed	to	know	everything.	One	should	not,	therefore,	remain	in	material
perplexities	but	should	approach	a	spiritual	master.	This	is	the	purport	of	this
verse.
Who	is	the	man	in	material	perplexities?	It	is	he	who	does	not	understand
the	problems	of	life.	In	the	
Garga	Upaniṣad	
the	perplexed	man	is	described	as
follows:
yo	vā	etad	akṣaraṁ	gārgy	aviditvāsmāl	lokāt	praiti	sa	kṛpaṇaḥ
"He	is	a	miserly	man	who	does	not	solve	the	problems	of	life	as	a	human	and
who	thus	quits	this	world	like	the	cats	and	dogs,	without	understanding	the
science	of	self-realization."	This	human	form	of	life	is	a	most	valuable	asset
for	the	living	entity	who	can	ultilize	it	for	solving	the	problems	of	life;
therefore,	one	who	does	not	utilize	this	opportunity	properly	is	a	miser.	On	the
other	hand,	there	is	the	
brāhmaṇa,	
or	he	who	is	intelligent	enough	to	utilize
this	body	to	solve	all	the	problems	of	life.
The	
kṛpaṇas,
	or	miserly	persons,	waste	their	time	in	being	overly
affectionate	for	family,	society,	country,	etc.,	in	the	material	conception	of	life.
One	is	often	attached	to	family	life,	namely	to	wife,	children	and	other
members,	on	the	basis	of	"skin	disease."	The	
kṛpaṇa	
thinks	that	he	is	able	to
protect	his	family	members	from	death;	or	the	
kṛpaṇa	
thinks	that	his	family	or
society	can	save	him	from	the	verge	of	death.	Such	family	attachment	can	be
found	even	in	the	lower	animals	who	take	care	of	children	also.	Being
intelligent,	Arjuna	could	understand	that	his	affection	for	family	members	and
his	wish	to	protect	them	from	death	were	the	causes	of	his	perplexities.
Although	he	could	understand	that	his	duty	to	fight	was	awaiting	him,	still,	on
account	of	miserly	weakness,	he	could	not	discharge	the	duties.	He	is
therefore	asking	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	the	supreme	spiritual	master,	to	make	a	definite
solution.	He	offers	himself	to	Kṛṣṇa	as	a	disciple.	He	wants	to	stop	friendly
talks.	Talks	between	the	master	and	the	disciple	are	serious,	and	now	Arjunawants	to	talk	very	seriously	before	the	recognized	spiritual	master.	Kṛṣṇa	is
therefore	the	original	spiritual	master	of	the	science	of	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
and
Arjuna	is	the	first	disciple	for	understanding	the	
Gītā.	
How	Arjuna
understands	the	
Bhagavad-gītā
	is	stated	in	the	
Gītā	
itself.	And	yet	foolish
mundane	scholars	explain	that	one	need	not	submit	to	Kṛṣṇa	as	a	person,	but
to	"the	unborn	within	Kṛṣṇa."	There	is	no	difference	between	Kṛṣṇa's	within
and	without.	And	one	who	has	no	sense	of	this	understanding	is	the	greatest
fool	in	trying	to	understand	
Bhagavad-gītā.
TEXT	8
न
	
ि ह
	
प ् र प ᇽ य ा ि म
	
म म ा प न ु ሱ ा द ्
-
य ᇫ छ ो क म ु ᇫ छ ो ष ण ि म ि ᇳ द ् र य ा ण ा म ्
	
।
अ व ा ᇴ य
	
भ ू म ा व स प ᇰ न म ृ ሬ ं
	
र ा ᇬ य ं
	
स ु र ा ण ा म ि प
	
च ा ि ध प ᇰ य म ्
	
॥
८
॥
na	hi	prapaśyāmi	mamāpanudyād
yac	chokam	ucchoṣaṇam	indriyāṇām
avāpya	bhūmāv	asapatnam	ṛddhaṁ
rājyaṁ	surāṇām	api	cādhipatyam
na—
do	not;	
hi—
certainly;	
prapaśyāmi—
I	see;	
mama—
my;	
apanudyāt—
they	can	drive	away;	
yat—
that;	
śokam—
lamentation;	
ucchoṣaṇam—
drying	up;
indriyāṇām—
of	the	senses;	
avāpya—
achieving;	
bhūmau—
on	the	earth;
asapatnam—
without	rival;	
ṛddham—
prosperous;	
rājyam—
kingdom;	
surāṇām
—
of	the	demigods;	
api—
even;	
ca—
also;	
ādhipatyam—
supremacy.
TRANSLATION
I	can	find	no	means	to	drive	away	this	grief	which	is	drying	up	my
senses.	I	will	not	be	able	to	destroy	it	even	if	I	win	an	unrivalled	kingdom
on	the	earth	with	sovereignty	like	the	demigods	in	heaven.
PURPORT
Although	Arjuna	was	putting	forward	so	many	arguments	based	onknowledge	of	the	principles	of	religion	and	moral	codes,	it	appears	that	he	was
unable	to	solve	his	real	problem	without	the	help	of	the	spiritual	master,	Lord
Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.	He	could	understand	that	his	so-called	knowledge	was	useless	in
driving	away	his	problems,	which	were	drying	up	his	whole	existence;	and	it
was	impossible	for	him	to	solve	such	perplexities	without	the	help	of	a
spiritual	master	like	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.	Academic	knowledge,	scholarship,	high
position,	etc.,	are	all	useless	in	solving	the	problems	of	life;	help	can	only	be
given	by	a	spiritual	master	like	Kṛṣṇa.	Therefore,	the	conclusion	is	that	a
spiritual	master	who	is	one	hundred	percent	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	is	the	bona	fide
spiritual	master,	for	he	can	solve	the	problems	of	life.	Lord	Caitanya	said	that
one	who	is	master	in	the	science	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	regardless	of	his
social	position,	is	the	real	spiritual	master.
kibāvipra,	kibā	nyāsī,	śūdra	kene	naya
yei	kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā,	sei	'guru'	haya.
(Caitanya-caritāmṛta,	Madhya	8.127)
"It	does	not	matter	whether	a	person	is	a	
vipra	
[learned	scholar	in	Vedic
wisdom]	or	is	born	in	a	lower	family,	or	is	in	the	renounced	order	of	life–if	he
is	master	in	the	science	of	Kṛṣṇa,	he	is	the	perfect	and	bona	fide	spiritual
master."	So	without	being	a	master	in	the	science	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	no
one	is	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master.	It	is	also	said	in	Vedic	literatures:
ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo	vipro	mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ
avaiṣṇavo	gurur	na	syād	vaiṣṇavaḥ	śvapaco	guruḥ
"A	scholarly	
brāhmaṇa,	
expert	in	all	subjects	of	Vedic	knowledge,	is	unfit	to
become	a	spiritual	master	without	being	a	Vaiṣṇava,	or	expert	in	the	science	of
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	But	a	person	born	in	a	family	of	a	lower	caste	can
become	a	spiritual	master	if	he	is	a	Vaiṣṇava,	or	Kṛṣṇa	conscious."
The	problems	of	material	existence
—
birth,	old	age,	disease	and	death
—
cannot	be	counteracted	by	accumulation	of	wealth	and	economic
development.	In	many	parts	of	the	world	there	are	states	which	are	replete
with	all	facilities	of	life,	which	are	full	of	wealth,	and	economically
developed,	yet	the	problems	of	material	existence	are	still	present.	They	are
seeking	peace	in	different	ways,	but	they	can	achieve	real	happiness	only	if
they	consult	Kṛṣṇa,	or	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
and	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam—
which
constitute	the	science	of	Kṛṣṇa–or	the	bona	fide	representative	of	Kṛṣṇa,	the
man	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.If	economic	development	and	material	comforts	could	drive	away	one's
lamentations	for	family,	social,	national	or	international	inebrieties,	then
Arjuna	would	not	have	said	that	even	an	unrivalled	kingdom	on	earth	or
supremacy	like	that	of	the	demigods	in	the	heavenly	planets	would	not	be	able
to	drive	away	his	lamentations.	He	sought,	therefore,	refuge	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	and	that	is	the	right	path	for	peace	and	harmony.	Economic
development	or	supremacy	over	the	world	can	be	finished	at	any	moment	by
the	cataclysms	of	material	nature.	Even	elevation	into	a	higher	planetary
situation,	as	men	are	now	seeking	a	place	on	the	moon	planet,	can	also	be
finished	at	one	stroke.	The	
Bhagavad-gītā	
confirms	this:	
kṣīṇe	puṇye
martyalokaṁ	viśanti	
"When	the	results	of	pious	activities	are	finished,	one
falls	down	again	from	the	peak	of	happiness	to	the	lowest	status	of	life."	Many
politicians	of	the	world	have	fallen	down	in	that	way.	Such	downfalls	only
constitute	more	causes	for	lamentation.
Therefore,	if	we	want	to	curb	lamentation	for	good,	then	we	have	to	take
shelter	of	Kṛṣṇa,	as	Arjuna	is	seeking	to	do.	So	Arjuna	asked	Kṛṣṇa	to	solve
his	problem	definitely,	and	that	is	the	way	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
TEXT	9
स ᇮ ज य
	
उ व ा च
	
।
ए व म ु ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
ᇦ ष ी क े श ं
	
ग ु ड ा क े श ः
	
प र ᇳ त प
	
।
न
	
य ो ᇰ ᇿ य
	
इ ि त
	
ग ो ि व ᇳ द म ु ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
त ू ᇾ ण ी ं
	
ब भ ू व
	
ह
	
॥
९
॥
sañjaya	uvāca
evam	uktvā	hṛṣīkeśaṁ
guḍākeśaḥ	parantapaḥ
na	yotsya	iti	govindam
uktvā	tūṣṇīṁ	babhūva	ha
sañjayaḥ	uvāca—
Sañjaya	said;	
evam—
thus;	
uktvā—
speaking;	
hṛṣīkeśam—
unto	Kṛṣṇa,	the	master	of	the	senses;	
guḍākeśaḥ—
Arjuna,	the	master	at
curbing	ignorance;	
parantapaḥ—
the	chastiser	of	the	enemies;	
na	yotsye—
I
shall	not	fight;	
iti—
thus;	
govindam—
unto	Kṛṣṇa,	the	giver	of	pleasure;	
uktvā
—
saying;	
tūṣṇīm—
silent;	
babhūva—
became;	
ha—
certainly.
TRANSLATIONSañjaya	said:	Having	spoken	thus,	Arjuna,	chastiser	of	enemies,	told
Kṛṣṇa,	"Govinda,	I	shall	not	fight,"	and	fell	silent.
PURPORT
Dhṛtarāṣṭra	must	have	been	very	glad	to	understand	that	Arjuna	was	not
going	to	fight	and	was	instead	leaving	the	battlefield	for	the	begging
profession.	But	Sañjaya	disappointed	him	again	in	relating	that	Arjuna	was
competent	to	kill	his	enemies	
(parantapaḥ).	
Although	Arjuna	was	for	the	time
being	overwhelmed	with	false	grief	due	to	family	affection,	he	surrendered
unto	Kṛṣṇa,	the	supreme	spiritual	master,	as	a	disciple.	This	indicated	that	he
would	soon	be	free	from	the	false	lamentation	resulting	from	family	affection
and	would	be	enlightened	with	perfect	knowledge	of	self-realization,	or	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	and	would	then	surely	fight.	Thus	Dhṛtarāṣṭra's	joy	would	be
frustrated,	since	Arjuna	would	be	enlightened.	by	Kṛṣṇa	and	would	fight	to	the
end.
TEXT	10
त म ु व ा च
	
ᇦ ष ी क े श ः
	
प ् र ह स ि ᇳ न व
	
भ ा र त
	
।
स े न य ो ኄ भ य ो म ᆼ ᇲ य े
	
ि व ष ी द ᇳ त ि म द ं
	
व च ः
	
॥
१ ०
॥
tam	uvāca	hṛṣīkeśaḥ
prahasann	iva	bhārata
senayor	ubhayor	madhye
viṣīdantam	idaṁ	vacaḥ
tam—
unto	him;	
uvāca—
said;	
hṛṣīkeśaḥ—
the	master	of	the	senses,	Kṛṣṇa;
prahasan—
smiling;	
iva—
like	that;	
bhārata—
O	Dhṛtarāṣṭra,	descendant	of
Bharata;	
senayoḥ—
of	the	armies;	
ubhayoḥ—
of	both	parties;	
madhye—
between;	
viṣīdantam—
unto	the	lamenting	one;	
idam—
the	following;	
vacaḥ
—
words.
TRANSLATIONO	descendant	of	Bharata,	at	that	time	Kṛṣṇa,	smiling,	in	the	midst	of
both	the	armies,	spoke	the	following	words	to	the	grief-stricken	Arjuna.
PURPORT
The	talk	was	going	on	between	intimate	friends,	namely	the	Hṛṣīkeśa	and
the	Guḍākeśa.	As	friends,	both	of	them	were	on	the	same	level,	but	one	of
them	voluntarily	became	a	student	of	the	other.	Kṛṣṇa	was	smiling	because	a
friend	had	chosen	to	become	a	disciple.	As	Lord	of	all,	He	is	always	in	the
superior	position	as	the	master	of	everyone,	and	yet	the	Lord	accepts	one	who
wishes	to	be	a	friend,	a	son,	a	lover	or	a	devotee,	or	who	wants	Him	in	such	a
role.	But	when	He	was	accepted	as	the	master,	He	at	once	assumed	the	role
and	talked	with	the	disciple	like	the	master
—	
with	gravity,	as	it	is	required.	It
appears	that	the	talk	between	the	master	and	the	disciple	was	openly
exchanged	in	the	presence	of	both	armies	so	that	all	were	benefitted.	So	the
talks	of	
Bhagavad-gītā	
are	not	for	any	particular	person,	society,	or
community,	but	they	are	for	all,	and	friends	or	enemies	are	equally	entitled	to
hear	them.
TEXT	11
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
अ श ो ᇫ य ा न ᇳ व श ो च ᇿ ᇰ व ं
	
प ् र ᇥ ा व ा द ा ं ᇽ च
	
भ ा ष स े
	
।
ग त ा स ू न ग त ा स ू ं ᇽ च
	
न ा न ु श ो च ि ᇳ त
	
प ि ᇯ ड त ा ः
	
॥
१ १
॥
śrī-bhagavān	uvāca
aśocyān	anvaśocas	tvaṁ
prajñā-vādāṁś	ca	bhāṣase
gatāsūn	agatāsūṁś	ca
nānuśocanti	paṇḍitāḥ
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
aśocyān—
that	which	is	not	worthy	of	lamentation;	
anvaśocaḥ—
you	are	lamenting;	
tvam
—
you;
	prajñā-vādāḥ—
learned	talks;	
ca—
also;	
bhāṣase—
speaking;	
gata—
lost;	
asūn—
life;	
agata—
not	past;	
asūn—
life;	
ca—
also;	
na—
never;	
anuśocanti
—	
lament;	
paṇḍitāḥ—
the	learned.TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	While	speaking	learned	words,	you	are
mourning	for	what	is	not	worthy	of	grief.	Those	who	are	wise	lament
neither	for	the	living	nor	the	dead.
PURPORT
The	Lord	at	once	took	the	position	of	the	teacher	and	chastised	the	student,
calling	him,	indirectly,	a	fool.	The	Lord	said,	you	are	talking	like	a	learned
man,	but	you	do	not	know	that	one	who	is	learned
—
one	who	knows	what	is
body	and	what	is	soul
—
does	not	lament	for	any	stage	of	the	body,	neither	in
the	living	nor	in	the	dead	condition.	As	it	will	be	explained	in	later	chapters,	it
will	be	clear	that	knowledge	means	to	know	matter	and	spirit	and	the
controller	of	both.	Arjuna	argued	that	religious	principles	should	be	given
more	importance	than	politics	or	sociology,	but	he	did	not	know	that
knowledge	of	matter,	soul	and	the	Supreme	is	even	more	important	than
religious	formularies.	And,	because	he	was	lacking	in	that	knowledge,	he
should	not	have	posed	himself	as	a	very	learned	man.	As	he	did	not	happen	to
be	a	very	learned	man,	he	was	consequently	lamenting	for	something	which
was	unworthy	of	lamentation.	The	body	is	born	and	is	destined	to	be
vanquished	today	or	tomorrow;	therefore	the	body	is	not	as	important	as	the
soul.	One	who	knows	this	is	actually	learned,	and	for	him	there	is	no	cause	for
lamentation,	regardless	of	the	condition	of	the	material	body.
TEXT	12
न ᇰ व े व ा ह ं
	
ज ा त ु
	
न ा स ं
	
न
	
ᇰ व ं
	
न े म े
	
ज न ा ि ध प ा ः
	
।
न
	
च ै व
	
न भ ि व ᇾ य ा म ः
	
स व ᆹ
	
व य म त ः
	
प र म ्
	
॥
१ २
॥
na	tv	evāhaṁ	jātu	nāsaṁ
na	tvaṁ	neme	janādhipāḥ
na	caiva	na	bhaviṣyāmaḥ
sarve	vayam	ataḥ	param
na—
never;	
tu—
but;	
eva—
certainly;	
aham—
I;	
jātu—
become;	
na—
never;āsam—
existed;	
na—
it	is	not	so;	
tvam—
yourself;	
na—
not;	
ime—
all	these;
janādhipāḥ—
kings;	
na—
never;	
ca—
also;	
eva—
certainly;	
na—
not	like	that;
bhaviṣyāmaḥ—
shall	exist;	
sarve—
all	of	us;	
vayam—
we;	
ataḥ	param
—
hereafter.
TRANSLATION
Never	was	there	a	time	when	I	did	not	exist,	nor	you,	nor	all	these
kings;	nor	in	the	future	shall	any	of	us	cease	to	be.
PURPORT
In	the	
Vedas
,	in	the	
Kaṭha	Upaniṣad	
as	well	as	in	the	
Śvetāśvatara
Upaniṣad,
	it	is	said	that	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is	the	maintainer
of	innumerable	living	entities,	in	terms	of	their	different	situations	according
to	individual	work	and	reaction	of	work.	That	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead	is	also,	by	His	plenary	portions,	alive	in	the	heart	of	every	living
entity.	Only	saintly	persons	who	can	see,	within	and	without,	the	same
Supreme	Lord,	can	actually	attain	to	perfect	and	eternal	peace.
nityo	nityānāṁ	cetanaś	cetanānām
eko	bahūnāṁ	yo	vidadhāti	kāmān
tam	ātmasthaṁ	ye	'nupaśyanti	dhīrās
teṣāṁ	śāntiḥ	śāśvatī	netareṣām.
(Kaṭha	2.2.13)
The	same	Vedic	truth	given	to	Arjuna	is	given	to	all	persons	in	the	world
who	pose	themselves	as	very	learned	but	factually	have	but	a	poor	fund	of
knowledge.	The	Lord	says	clearly	that	He	Himself,	Arjuna,	and	all	the	kings
who	are	assembled	on	the	battlefield,	are	eternally	individual	beings	and	that
the	Lord	is	eternally	the	maintainer	of	the	individual	living	entities	both	in
their	conditioned	as	well	as	in	their	liberated	situations.	The	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead	is	the	supreme	individual	person,	and	Arjuna,	the
Lord's	eternal	associate,	and	all	the	kings	assembled	there	are	individual,
eternal	persons.	It	is	not	that	they	did	not	exist	as	individuals	in	the	past,	and	it
is	not	that	they	will	not	remain	eternal	persons.	Their	individuality	existed	in
the	past,	and	their	individuality	will	continue	in	the	future	withoutinterruption.	Therefore,	there	is	no	cause	for	lamentation	for	anyone.
The	Māyāvādī	theory	that	after	liberation	the	individual	soul,	separated	by
the	covering	of	māyā	or	illusion,	will	merge	into	the	impersonal	Brahman	and
lose	its	individual	existence	is	not	supported	herein	by	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	the
supreme	authority.	Nor	is	the	theory	that	we	only	think	of	individuality	in	the
conditioned	state	supported	herein.	Kṛṣṇa	clearly	says	herein	that	in	the	future
also	the	individuality	of	the	Lord	and	others,	as	it	is	confirmed	in	the
Upaniṣads,	
will	continue	eternally.	This	statement	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	authoritative
because	Kṛṣṇa	cannot	be	subject	to	illusion.	If	individuality	is	not	a	fact,	then
Kṛṣṇa	would	not	have	stressed	it	so	much	
—
even	for	the	future.	The	Māyāvādī
may	argue	that	the	individuality	spoken	of	by	Kṛṣṇa	is	not	spiritual,	but
material.	Even	accepting	the	argument	that	the	individuality	is	material,	then
how	can	one	distinguish	Kṛṣṇa's	individuality?	Kṛṣṇa	affirms	His	individuality
in	the	past	and	confirms	His	individuality	in	the	future	also.	He	has	confirmed
His	individuality	in	many	ways,	and	impersonal	Brahman	has	been	declared	to
be	subordinate	to	Him.	Kṛṣṇa	has	maintained	spiritual	individuality	all	along;
if	He	is	accepted	as	an	ordinary	conditioned	soul	in	individual	consciousness,
then	His	
Bhagavad-gītā	
has	no	value	as	authoritative	scripture.	A	common
man	with	all	the	four	defects	of	human	frailty	is	unable	to	teach	that	which	is
worth	hearing.	The	
Gītā
	is	above	such	literature.	No	mundane	book	compares
with	the	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
When	one	accepts	Kṛṣṇa	as	an	ordinary	man,	the	
Gītā
loses	all	importance.	The	Māyāvādī	argues	that	the	plurality	mentioned	in	this
verse	is	conventional	and	that	it	refers	to	the	body.	But	previous	to	this	verse
such	a	bodily	conception	is	already	condemned.	After	condemning	the	bodily
conception	of	the	living	entities,	how	was	it	possible	for	Kṛṣṇa	to	place	a
conventional	proposition	on	the	body	again?	Therefore,	individuality	is
maintained	on	spiritual	grounds	and	is	thus	confirmed	by	great	
ācāryas	
like
Śrī	Rāmānuja	and	others.	It	is	clearly	mentioned	in	many	places	in	the	
Gītā
that	this	spiritual	individuality	is	understood	by	those	who	are	devotees	of	the
Lord.	Those	who	are	envious	of	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead
have	no	bona	fide	access	to	the	great	literature.	The	nondevotee's	approach	to
the	teachings	of	the	
Gīta	
is	something	like	bees	licking	on	a	bottle	of	honey.
One	cannot	have	a	taste	of	honey	unless	one	opens	the	bottle.	Similarly,	the
mysticism	of	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
can	be	understood	only	by	devotees,	and	no
one	else	can	taste	it,	as	it	is	stated	in	the	Fourth	Chapter	of	the	book.	Nor	can
the	
Gītā	
be	touched	by	persons	who	envy	the	very	existence	of	the	Lord.
Therefore,	the	Māyāvādī	explanation	of	the	
Gītā	
is	a	most	misleading
presentation	of	the	whole	truth.	Lord	Caitanya	has	forbidden	us	to	readcommentations	made	by	the	Māyāvādīs	and	warns	that	one	who	takes	to	such
an	understanding	of	the	Māyāvādī	philosophy	loses	all	power	to	understand
the	real	mystery	of	the	
Gītā.	
If	individuality	refers	to	the	empirical	universe,
then	there	is	no	need	of	teaching	by	the	Lord.	The	plurality	of	the	individual
soul	and	of	the	Lord	is	an	eternal	fact,	and	it	is	confirmed	by	the	
Vedas	
as
above	mentioned.
TEXT	13
द े ि ह न ो ऽ ि ᇿ म ᇳ य थ ा
	
द े ह े
	
क ौ म ा र ं
	
य ौ व न ं
	
ज र ा
	
।
त थ ा
	
द े ह ा ᇳ त र प ् र ा ि ᇴ त ध ी ᆼ र ᇿ त त ् र
	
न
	
म ु ቋ ि त
	
॥
१ ३
॥
dehino	'smin	yathā	dehe
kaumāraṁ	yauvanaṁ	jarā
tathā	dehāntara-prāptir
dhīras	tatra	na	muhyati
dehinaḥ—
of	the	embodied;	
asmin—
in	this;	
yathā—
as;
	dehe—
in	the	body;
kaumāram—
boyhood;	
yauvanam—
youth;	
jarā—
old	age;	
tathā—
similarly;
dehāntara—
transference	of	the	body;	
prāptiḥ—
achievement;	
dhīraḥ—
the
sober;	
tatra—
thereupon;	
na—
never;	
muhyati—
deluded.
TRANSLATION
As	the	embodied	soul	continually	passes,	in	this	body,	from	boyhood	to
youth	to	old	age,	the	soul	similarly	passes	into	another	body	at	death.	The
self-realized	soul	is	not	bewildered	by	such	a	change.
PURPORT
Since	every	living	entity	is	an	individual	soul,	each	is	changing	his	body
every	moment,	manifesting	sometimes	as	a	child,	sometimes	as	a	youth,	and
sometimes	as	an	old	man.	Yet	the	same	spirit	soul	is	there	and	does	not
undergo	any	change.	This	individual	soul	finally	changes	the	body	at	death
and	transmigrates	to	another	body;	and	since	it	is	sure	to	have	another	body	in
the	next	birth
—
either	material	or	spiritual
—
there	was	no	cause	for	lamentationby	Arjuna	on	account	of	death,	neither	for	Bhīṣma	nor	for	Droṇa,	for	whom	he
was	so	much	concerned.	Rather,	he	should	rejoice	for	their	changing	bodies
from	old	to	new	ones,	thereby	rejuvenating	their	energy.	Such	changes	of	body
account	for	varieties	of	enjoyment	or	suffering,	according	to	one's	work	in
life.	So	Bhīṣma	and	Droṇa,	being	noble	souls,	were	surely	going	to	have	either
spiritual	bodies	in	the	next	life,	or	at	least	life	in	heavenly	bodies	for	superior
enjoyment	of	material	existence.	So,	in	either	case,	there	was	no	cause	of
lamentation.
Any	man	who	has	perfect	knowledge	of	the	constitution	of	the	individual
soul,	the	Supersoul,	and	nature
—
both	material	and	spiritual
—
is	called	a	
dhīra
or	a	most	sober	man.	Such	a	man	is	never	deluded	by	the	change	of	bodies.
The	Māyāvādī	theory	of	oneness	of	the	spirit	soul	cannot	be	entertained	on	the
ground	that	spirit	soul	cannot	be	cut	into	pieces	as	a	fragmental	portion.	Such
cutting	into	different	individual	souls	would	make	the	Supreme	cleavable	or
changeable,	against	the	principle	of	the	Supreme	Soul	being	unchangeable.
As	confirmed	in	the	
Gītā,	
the	fragmental	portions	of	the	Supreme	exist
eternally	
(sanātana)	
and	are	called	
kṣara;	
that	is,	they	have	a	tendency	to	fall
down	into	material	nature.	These	fragmental	portions	are	eternally	so,	and
even	after	liberation,	the	individual	soul	remains	the	same
—
fragmental.	But
once	liberated,	he	lives	an	eternal	life	in	bliss	and	knowledge	with	the
Personality	of	Godhead.	The	theory	of	reflection	can	be	applied	to	the
Supersoul	who	is	present	in	each	and	every	individual	body	and	is	known	as
the	Paramātmā,	who	is	different	from	the	individual	living	entity.	When	the
sky	is	reflected	in	water,	the	reflections	represent	both	the	sun	and	the	moon
and	the	stars	also.	The	stars	can	be	compared	to	the	living	entities	and	the	sun
or	the	moon	to	the	Supreme	Lord.	The	individual	fragmental	spirit	soul	is
represented	by	Arjuna,	and	the	Supreme	Soul	is	the	Personality	of	Godhead
Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.	They	are	not	on	the	same	level,	as	it	will	be	apparent	in	the
beginning	of	the	Fourth	Chapter.	If	Arjuna	is	on	the	same	level	with	Kṛṣṇa,
and	Kṛṣṇa	is	not	superior	to	Arjuna,	then	their	relationship	of	instructor	and
instructed	becomes	meaningless.	If	both	of	them	are	deluded	by	the	illusory
energy	
(māyā),	
then	there	is	no	need	of	one	being	the	instructor	and	the	other
the	instructed.	Such	instruction	would	be	useless	because,	in	the	clutches	of
māyā,	
no	one	can	be	an	authoritative	instructor.	Under	the	circumstances,	it	is
admitted	that	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme	Lord,	superior	in	position	to	the
living	entity,	Arjuna,	who	is	a	forgotten	soul	deluded	by	
māyā.
TEXT	14म ा त ् र ा ᇿ प श ा ᆼ ᇿ त ु
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
श ी त ो ᇾ ण स ु ख द ु ः ख द ा ः
	
।
आ ग म ा प ा ि य न ो ऽ ि न ᇰ य ा ᇿ त ा ं ि ᇿ त ि त ᇤ ᇿ व
	
भ ा र त
	
॥
१ ४
॥
mātrā-sparśās	tu	kaunteya
śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ
āgamāpāyino	'nityās
tāṁs	titikṣasva	bhārata
mātrā—
sensuous;	
sparśāḥ—
perception;	
tu—
only;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of
Kuntī;	
śīta—
winter;	
uṣṇa—
summer;	
sukha—
happiness;	
duḥkha-dāḥ—
giving
pain;	
āgama—
appearing;	
apāyinaḥ—
disappearing;	
anityāḥ—
nonpermanent;
tān—
all	of	them;	
titikṣasva—
just	try	to	tolerate;	
bhārata
—O	descendant	of	the
Bhārata	dynasty.
TRANSLATION
O	son	of	Kuntī,	the	nonpermanent	appearance	of	happiness	and
distress,	and	their	disappearance	in	due	course,	are	like	the	appearance
and	disappearance	of	winter	and	summer	seasons.	They	arise	from	sense
perception,	O	scion	of	Bharata,	and	one	must	learn	to	tolerate	them
without	being	disturbed.
PURPORT
In	the	proper	discharge	of	duty,	one	has	to	learn	to	tolerate	nonpermanent
appearances	and	disappearances	of	happiness	and	distress.	According	to	Vedic
injunction,	one	has	to	take	his	bath	early	in	the	morning	even	during	the
month	of	
Māgha	
(January-	February).	It	is	very	cold	at	that	time,	but	in	spite
of	that	a	man	who	abides	by	the	religious	principles	does	not	hesitate	to	take
his	bath.	Similarly,	a	woman	does	not	hesitate	to	cook	in	the	kitchen	in	the
months	of	May	and	June,	the	hottest	part	of	the	summer	season.	One	has	to
execute	his	duty	in	spite	of	climatic	inconveniences.	Similarly,	to	fight	is	the
religious	principle	of	the	
kṣatriyas,	
and	although	one	has	to	fight	with	some
friend	or	relative,	one	should	not	deviate	from	his	prescribed	duty.	One	has	to
follow	the	prescribed	rules	and	regulations	of	religious	principles	in	order	to
rise	up	to	the	platform	of	knowledge	because	by	knowledge	and	devotion	only
can	one	liberate	himself	from	the	clutches	of	
māyā
	(illusion).The	two	different	names	of	address	given	to	Arjuna	are	also	significant.	To
address	him	as	Kaunteya	signifies	his	great	blood	relations	from	his	mother's
side;	and	to	address	him	as	Bhārata	signifies	his	greatness	from	his	father's
side.	From	both	sides	he	is	supposed	to	have	a	great	heritage.	A	great	heritage
brings	responsibility	in	the	matter	of	proper	discharge	of	duties;	therefore,	he
cannot	avoid	fighting.
TEXT	15
य ं
	
ि ह
	
न
	
ᇼ य थ य ᇳ ᇰ य े त े
	
प ु ኄ ष ं
	
प ु ኄ ष ष ᆼ भ
	
।
स म द ु ः ख स ु ख ं
	
ध ी र ं
	
स ो ऽ म ृ त ᇰ व ा य
	
क ᇺ प त े
	
॥
१ ५
॥
yaṁ	hi	na	vyathayanty	ete
puruṣaṁ	puruṣarṣabha
sama-duḥkha-sukhaṁ	dhīraṁ
so	'mṛtatvāya	kalpate
yam—
one	who;
	hi—
certainly;	
na—
never;	
vyathayanti—
are	distressing;	
ete
—	
all	these;	
puruṣam—
to	a	person;	
puruṣarṣabha—
is	best	among	men;	
sama
—	
unaltered;	
duḥkha—
distress;	
sukham—
happiness;	
dhīram—
patient;	
saḥ
—
he;	
amṛtatvāya—
for	liberation;	
kalpate—
is	considered	eligible.
TRANSLATION
O	best	among	men	[Arjuna],	the	person	who	is	not	disturbed	by
happiness	and	distress	and	is	steady	in	both	is	certainly	eligible	for
liberation.
PURPORT
Anyone	who	is	steady	in	his	determination	for	the	advanced	stage	of
spiritual	realization	and	can	equally	tolerate	the	onslaughts	of	distress	and
happiness	is	certainly	a	person	eligible	for	liberation.	In	the	
varṇāśrama
institution,	the	fourth	stage	of	life,	namely	the	renounced	order	
(sannyāsa)	
is	a
painstaking	situation.	But	one	who	is	serious	about	making	his	life	perfect
surely	adopts	the	
sannyāsa
	order	of	life	in	spite	of	all	difficulties.	Thedifficulties	usually	arise	from	having	to	sever	family	relationships,	to	give	up
the	connection	of	wife	and	children.	But	if	anyone	is	able	to	tolerate	such
difficulties,	surely	his	path	to	spiritual	realization	is	complete.	Similarly,	in
Arjuna's	discharge	of	duties	as	a	
kṣatriya,	
he	is	advised	to	persevere,	even	if	it
is	difficult	to	fight	with	his	family	members	or	similarly	beloved	persons.
Lord	Caitanya	took	
sannyāsa
	at	the	age	of	twenty-four,	and	His	dependants,
young	wife	as	well	as	old	mother,	had	no	one	else	to	look	after	them.	Yet	for	a
higher	cause	He	took	
sannyāsa
	and	was	steady	in	the	discharge	of	higher
duties.	That	is	the	way	of	achieving	liberation	from	material	bondage.
TEXT	16
न ा स त ो
	
ि व ध त े
	
भ ा व ो
	
न ा भ ा व ो
	
ि व ध त े
	
स त ः
	
।
	
उ भ य ो र ि प
	
द ृ ᇾ ट ो ᇳ त ᇿ ᇰ व न य ो ᇿ त ᇰ ᇰ व
	
द ि श ᆼ ि भ ः
	
॥
१ ६
॥
nāsato	vidyate	bhāvo
nābhāvo	vidyate	sataḥ
ubhayor	api	dṛṣṭo	'ntas
tv	anayos	tattva-darśibhiḥ
na—
never;	
asataḥ—
of	the	nonexistent;	
vidyate—
there	is;	
bhāvaḥ
—
endurance;	
na—
never;	
abhāvaḥ—
changing	quality;	
vidyate—
there	is;	
sataḥ
—
of	the	eternal;	
ubhayoḥ—
of	the	two;	
api—
verily;	
dṛṣṭaḥ—
observed;	
antaḥ—
conclusion;	
tu—
but;	
anayoḥ—
of	them;	
tattva—
truth;	
darśibhiḥ—
by	the	seers.
TRANSLATION
Those	who	are	seers	of	the	truth	have	concluded	that	of	the	nonexistent
there	is	no	endurance,	and	of	the	existent	there	is	no	cessation.	This	seers
have	concluded	by	studying	the	nature	of	both.
PURPORT
There	is	no	endurance	of	the	changing	body.	That	the	body	is	changing
every	moment	by	the	actions	and	reactions	of	the	different	cells	is	admitted	by
modern	medical	science;	and	thus	growth	and	old	age	are	taking	place	in	thebody.	But	the	spirit	soul	exists	permanently,	remaining	the	same	despite	all
changes	of	the	body	and	the	mind.	That	is	the	difference	between	matter	and
spirit.	By	nature,	the	body	is	ever	changing,	and	the	soul	is	eternal.	This
conclusion	is	established	by	all	classes	of	seers	of	the	truth,	both	impersonalist
and	personalist.	In	the	
Viṣṇu	Purāṇa	
it	is	stated	that	Viṣṇu	and	His	abodes	all
have	self-illuminated	spiritual	existence.	"
Jyotīṁṣi	viṣṇur	bhavanāni
viṣṇuḥ.
"The	words	existent	and	nonexistent	refer	only	to	spirit	and	matter.
That	is	the	version	of	all	seers	of	truth.
This	is	the	beginning	of	the	instruction	by	the	Lord	to	the	living	entities
who	are	bewildered	by	the	influence	of	ignorance.	Removal	of	ignorance
involves	the	reestablishment	of	the	eternal	relationship	between	the	worshiper
and	the	worshipable	and	the	consequent	understanding	of	the	difference
between	the	part	and	parcel	living	entities	and	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.	One	can	understand	the	nature	of	the	Supreme	by	thorough	study	of
oneself,	the	difference	between	oneself	and	the	Supreme	being	understood	as
the	relationship	between	the	part	and	the	whole.	In	the	
Vedānta-sūtras,	
as	well
as	in	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,	
the	Supreme	has	been	accepted	as	the	origin	of
all	emanations.	Such	emanations	are	experienced	by	superior	and	inferior
natural	sequences.	The	living	entities	belong	to	the	superior	nature,	as	it	will
be	revealed	in	the	Seventh	Chapter.	Although	there	is	no	difference	between
the	energy	and	the	energetic,	the	energetic	is	accepted	as	the	Supreme,	and
energy	or	nature	is	accepted	as	the	subordinate.	The	living	entities,	therefore,
are	always	subordinate	to	the	Supreme	Lord,	as	in	the	case	of	the	master	and
the	servant,	or	the	teacher	and	the	taught.	Such	clear	knowledge	is	impossible
to	understand	under	the	spell	of	ignorance,	and	to	drive	away	such	ignorance
the	Lord	teaches	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
for	the	enlightenment	of	all	living	entities
for	all	time.
TEXT	17
अ ि व न ा ि श
	
त ु
	
त द ् ि व द ् ि ध
	
य े न
	
स व ᆼ ि म द ं
	
त त म ्
	
।
ि व न ा श म ᇼ य य ᇿ य ा ᇿ य
	
न
	
क ि ᇽ च ᇰ क त ु ᆼ म ह ᆼ ि त
	
॥
१ ७
॥
avināśi	tu	tad	viddhi
yena	sarvam	idaṁ	tatam
vināśam	avyayasyāsya
na	kaścit	kartum	arhatiavināśi—
imperishable;	
tu—
but;	
tat—
that;	
viddhi—
know	it;	
yena—
by
whom;	
sarvam—
all	of	the	body;	
idam—
this;	
tatam—
widespread;	
vināśam
—
destruction;	
avyayasya—
of	the	imperishable;	
asya—
of	it;	
na	kaścit—
no	one;
kartum—
to	do;	
arhati—
able.
TRANSLATION
Know	that	which	pervades	the	entire	body	is	indestructible.	No	one	is
able	to	destroy	the	imperishable	soul.
PURPORT
This	verse	more	clearly	explains	the	real	nature	of	the	soul,	which	is	spread
all	over	the	body.	Anyone	can	understand	what	is	spread	all	over	the	body:	it
is	consciousness.	Everyone	is	conscious	of	the	pains	and	pleasures	of	the	body
in	part	or	as	a	whole.	This	spreading	of	consciousness	is	limited	within	one's
own	body.	The	pains	and	pleasures	of	one	body	are	unknown	to	another.
Therefore,	each	and	every	body	is	the	embodiment	of	an	individual	soul,	and
the	symptom	of	the	soul's	presence	is	perceived	as	individual	consciousness.
This	soul	is	described	as	one	ten-thousandth	part	of	the	upper	portion	of	the
hair	point	in	size.	The	
Śvetāśvatara	Upaniṣad	
confirms	this:
bālāgra-śata-bhāgasya	śatadhā	kalpitasya	ca
bhāgo	jīvaḥ	sa	vijñeyaḥ	sa	cānantyāya	kalpate.
"When	the	upper	point	of	a	hair	is	divided	into	one	hundred	parts	and	again
each	of	such	parts	is	further	divided	into	one	hundred	parts,	each	such	part	is
the	measurement	of	the	dimension	of	the	spirit	soul."	
(Śvet.	
5.9)	Similarly,	in
the	
Bhāgavatam	
the	same	version	is	stated:
keśāgra-śata-bhāgasya	śatāṁśaḥ	sādṛśātmakaḥ
jīvaḥ	sūkṣma-svarupo	'yaṁ	saṅkhyātīto	hi	cit-kaṇaḥ
"There	are	innumerable	particles	of	spiritual	atoms,	which	are	measured	as
one	ten-thousandth	of	the	upper	portion	of	the	hair."
Therefore,	the	individual	particle	of	spirit	soul	is	a	spiritual	atom	smaller
than	the	material	atoms,	and	such	atoms	are	innumerable.	This	very	smallspiritual	spark	is	the	basic	principle	of	the	material	body,	and	the	influence	of
such	a	spiritual	spark	is	spread	all	over	the	body	as	the	influence	of	the	active
principle	of	some	medicine	spreads	throughout	the	body.	This	current	of	the
spirit	soul	is	felt	all	over	the	body	as	consciousness,	and	that	is	the	proof	of	the
presence	of	the	soul.	Any	layman	can	understand	that	the	material	body	minus
consciousness	is	a	dead	body,	and	this	consciousness	cannot	be	revived	in	the
body	by	any	means	of	material	administration.	Therefore,	consciousness	is	not
due	to	any	amount	of	material	combination,	but	to	the	spirit	soul.	In	the
Muṇḍaka	Upaniṣad	
the	measurement	of	the	atomic	spirit	soul	is	further
explained:
eṣo	'ṇurātmā	cetasā	veditavyo
yasmin	prāṇaḥ	pañcadhā	saṁviveśa
prāṇaiś	cittaṁ	sarvam	otam	prajānāṁ
yasmin	viśuddhe	vibhavaty	eṣa	ātmā.
"The	soul	is	atomic	in	size	and	can	be	perceived	by	perfect	intelligence.	This
atomic	soul	is	floating	in	the	five	kinds	of	air	[
prāṇa,	apāna,	vyāna,	samāna
and	
udāna
],	is	situated	within	the	heart,	and	spreads	its	influence	all	over	the
body	of	the	embodied	living	entities.	When	the	soul	is	purified	from	the
contamination	of	the	five	kinds	of	material	air,	its	spiritual	influence	is
exhibited."	
(Muṇḍ.	3.1.9)
The	
haṭha-yoga	
system	is	meant	for	controlling	the	five	kinds	of	air
encircling	the	pure	soul	by	different	kinds	of	sitting	postures
—
not	for	any
material	profit,	but	for	liberation	of	the	minute	soul	from	the	entanglement	of
the	material	atmosphere.
So	the	constitution	of	the	atomic	soul	is	admitted	in	all	Vedic	literatures,
and	it	is	also	actually	felt	in	the	practical	experience	of	any	sane	man.	Only
the	insane	man	can	think	of	this	atomic	soul	as	all-pervading	
Viṣṇu-tattva.
The	influence	of	the	atomic	soul	can	be	spread	all	over	a	particular	body.
According	to	the	
Muṇḍaka	Upaniṣad,	
this	atomic	soul	is	situated	in	the	heart
of	every	living	entity,	and	because	the	measurement	of	the	atomic	soul	is
beyond	the	power	of	appreciation	of	the	material	scientists,	some	of	them
assert	foolishly	that	there	is	no	soul.	The	individual	atomic	soul	is	definitely
there	in	the	heart	along	with	the	Supersoul,	and	thus	all	the	energies	of	bodily
movement	are	emanating	from	this	part	of	the	body.	The	corpuscles	which
carry	the	oxygen	from	the	lungs	gather	energy	from	the	soul.	When	the	soul
passes	away	from	this	position,	activity	of	the	blood,	generating	fusion,ceases.	Medical	science	accepts	the	importance	of	the	red	corpuscles,	but	it
cannot	ascertain	that	the	source	of	the	energy	is	the	soul.	Medical	science,
however,	does	admit	that	the	heart	is	the	seat	of	all	energies	of	the	body.
Such	atomic	particles	of	the	spirit	whole	are	compared	to	the	sunshine
molecules.	In	the	sunshine	there	are	innumerable	radiant	molecules.	Similarly,
the	fragmental	parts	of	the	Supreme	Lord	are	atomic	sparks	of	the	rays	of	the
Supreme	Lord,	called	by	the	name	
prabhā	
or	superior	energy.	Neither	Vedic
knowledge	nor	modern	science	denies	the	existence	of	the	spirit	soul	in	the
body,	and	the	science	of	the	soul	is	explicitly	described	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā
by	the	Personality	of	Godhead	Himself.
TEXT	18
अ ᇳ त व ᇳ त
	
इ म े
	
द े ह ा
	
ि न ᇰ य ᇿ य ो ᇧ त ा ः
	
श र ी ि र ण ः
	
।
अ न ा ि श न ो ऽ प ् र म े य ᇿ य
	
त ᇿ म ा ሱ ु ᇲ य ᇿ व
	
भ ा र त
	
॥
१ ८
॥
antavanta	ime	dehā
nityasyoktāḥ	śarīriṇaḥ
anāśino	'prameyasya
tasmād	yudhyasva	bhārata
antavantaḥ—
perishable;	
ime—
all	these;
	dehāḥ—
material	bodies;	
nityasya—
eternal	in	existence;	
uktāḥ—
it	is	so	said;	
śarīriṇaḥ—
the	embodied	souls;
anāśinaḥ—
never	to	be	destroyed;	
aprameyasya—
immeasurable;	
tasmāt—
therefore;	
yudhyasva—
fight;	
bhārata—
O	descendant	of	Bharata.
TRANSLATION
Only	the	material	body	of	the	indestructible,	immeasurable	and	eternal
living	entity	is	subject	to	destruction;	therefore,	fight,	O	descendant	of
Bharata.
PURPORT
The	material	body	is	perishable	by	nature.	It	may	perish	immediately,	or	it
may	do	so	after	a	hundred	years.	It	is	a	question	of	time	only.	There	is	nochance	of	maintaining	it	indefinitely.	But	the	spirit	soul	is	so	minute	that	it
cannot	even	be	seen	by	an	enemy,	to	say	nothing	of	being	killed.	As
mentioned	in	the	previous	verse,	it	is	so	small	that	no	one	can	have	any	idea
how	to	measure	its	dimension.	So	from	both	viewpoints	there	is	no	cause	of
lamentation	because	the	living	entity	can	neither	be	killed	as	he	is,	nor	can	the
material	body,	which	cannot	be	saved	for	any	length	of	time,	be	permanently
protected.	The	minute	particle	of	the	whole	spirit	acquires	this	material	body
according	to	his	work,	and	therefore	observance	of	religious	principles	should
be	utilized.	In	the	
Vedānta-sūtras
	the	living	entity	is	qualified	as	light	because
he	is	part	and	parcel	of	the	supreme	light.	As	sunlight	maintains	the	entire
universe,	so	the	light	of	the	soul	maintains	this	material	body.	As	soon	as	the
spirit	soul	is	out	of	this	material	body,	the	body	begins	to	decompose;
therefore	it	is	the	spirit	soul	which	maintains	this	body.	The	body	itself	is
unimportant.	Arjuna	was	advised	to	fight	and	sacrifice	the	material	body	for
the	cause	of	religion.
TEXT	19
य
	
ए न ं
	
व े ि ሧ
	
ह ᇳ त ा र ं
	
य ᇽ च ै न ं
	
म ᇳ य त े
	
ह त म ्
	
।
उ भ ौ
	
त ौ
	
न
	
ि व ज ा न ी त ो
	
न ा य ं
	
ह ि ᇳ त
	
न
	
ह ᇳ य त े
	
॥
१ ९
॥
ya	enaṁ	vetti	hantāraṁ
yaś	cainaṁ	manyate	hatam
ubhau	tau	na	vijānīto
nāyaṁ	hanti	na	hanyate
yaḥ—
anyone;	
enam—
this;	
vetti—
knows;	
hantāram—
the	killer;	
yaḥ—
anyone;	
ca—
also;	
enam—
this;	
manyate—
thinks;	
hatam—
killed;	
ubhau—
both
of	them;	
tau—
they;	
na—
never;	
vijānītaḥ—
in	knowledge;	
na—
never;	
ayam
—
this;	
hanti—
kills;	
na—
nor;	
hanyate—
be	killed.
TRANSLATION
He	who	thinks	that	the	living	entity	is	the	slayer	or	that	he	is	slain,	does
not	understand.	One	who	is	in	knowledge	knows	that	the	self	slays	not	nor
is	slain.PURPORT
When	an	embodied	living	entity	is	hurt	by	fatal	weapons,	it	is	to	be	known
that	the	living	entity	within	the	body	is	not	killed.	The	spirit	soul	is	so	small
that	it	is	impossible	to	kill	him	by	any	material	weapon,	as	is	evident	from	the
previous	verses.	Nor	is	the	living	entity	killable	because	of	his	spiritual
constitution.	What	is	killed,	or	is	supposed	to	be	killed,	is	the	body	only.	This,
however,	does	not	at	all	encourage	killing	of	the	body.	The	Vedic	injunction	is,
"
māhiṁsyāt	sarva-bhūtāni
"	never	commit	violence	to	anyone.	Nor	does
understanding	that	the	living	entity	is	not	killed	encourage	animal	slaughter.
Killing	the	body	of	anyone	without	authority	is	abominable	and	is	punishable
by	the	law	of	the	state	as	well	as	by	the	law	of	the	Lord.	Arjuna,	however,	is
being	engaged	in	killing	for	the	principle	of	religion,	and	not	whimsically.
TEXT	20
न
	
ज ा य त े
	
ि म ् र य त े
	
व ा
	
क द ा ि च न ्
-
न ा य ं
	
भ ू ᇰ व ा
	
भ ि व त ा
	
व ा
	
न
	
भ ू य ः
	
।
अ ज ो
	
ि न ᇰ य ः
	
श ा ᇽ व त ो ऽ य ं
	
प ु र ा ण ो
	
न
	
ह ᇳ य त े
	
ह ᇳ य म ा न े
	
श र ी र े
	
॥
२ ०
॥
na	jāyate	mriyate	vā	kadācin
nāyaṁ	bhūtvā	bhavitā	vā	na	bhūyaḥ
ajo	nityaḥ	śāśvato	'yaṁ	purāṇo
na	hanyate	hanyamāne	śarīre
na—
never;	
jāyate—
takes	birth;	
mriyate—
never	dies;	
vā—
either;	
kadācit—
at	any	time	(past,	present	or	future);	
na—
never;	
ayam—
this;	
bhūtvā—
came
into	being;	
bhavitā—
will	come	to	be;	
vā—
or;	
na—
not;	
bhūyaḥ—
or	has	come
to	be;	
ajaḥ—
unborn;	
nityaḥ—
eternal;	
śāśvataḥ—
permanent;	
ayam—
this;
purāṇaḥ—
the	oldest;	
na—
never;	
hanyate—
is	killed;	
hanyamāne—
being
killed;	
śarīre—
by	the	body.
TRANSLATIONFor	the	soul	there	is	never	birth	nor	death.	Nor,	having	once	been,	does
he	ever	cease	to	be.	He	is	unborn,	eternal,	ever-existing,	undying	and
primeval.	He	is	not	slain	when	the	body	is	slain.
PURPORT
Qualitatively,	the	small	atomic	fragmental	part	of	the	Supreme	Spirit	is	one
with	the	Supreme.	He	undergoes	no	changes	like	the	body.	Sometimes	the	soul
is	called	the	steady,	or	
kūṭastha.	
The	body	is	subject	to	six	kinds	of
transformations.	It	takes	its	birth	in	the	womb	of	the	mother's	body,	remains
for	some	time,	grows,	produces	some	effects,	gradually	dwindles,	and	at	last
vanishes	into	oblivion.	The	soul,	however,	does	not	go	through	such	changes.
The	soul	is	not	born,	but,	because	he	takes	on	a	material	body,	the	body	takes
its	birth.	The	soul	does	not	take	birth	there,	and	the	soul	does	not	die.
Anything	which	has	birth	also	has	death.	And	because	the	soul	has	no	birth,	he
therefore	has	no	past,	present	or	future.	He	is	eternal,	ever-existing,	and
primeval–that	is,	there	is	no	trace	in	history	of	his	coming	into	being.	Under
the	impression	of	the	body,	we	seek	the	history	of	birth,	etc.,	of	the	soul.	The
soul	does	not	at	any	time	become	old,	as	the	body	does.	The	so-called	old
man,	therefore,	feels	himself	to	be	in	the	same	spirit	as	in	his	childhood	or
youth.	The	changes	of	the	body	do	not	affect	the	soul.	The	soul	does	not
deteriorate	like	a	tree,	nor	anything	material.	The	soul	has	no	by-product
either.	The	by-products	of	the	body,	namely	children,	are	also	different
individual	souls;	and,	owing	to	the	body,	they	appear	as	children	of	a
particular	man.	The	body	develops	because	of	the	soul's	presence,	but	the	soul
has	neither	offshoots	nor	change.	Therefore,	the	soul	is	free	from	the	six
changes	of	the	body.
In	the	
Kaṭha	Upaniṣad	
also	we	find	a	similar	passage	which	reads:
na	jāyate	mriyate	vā	vipaścin
nāyaṁ	kutaścin	na	vibhūva	kaścit
ajo	nityaḥ	śāśvato	'yaṁ	purāṇo
na	hanyate	hanyamāne	śarīre.
(
Kaṭha
	1.2.18)
The	meaning	and	purport	of	this	verse	is	the	same	as	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
but
here	in	this	verse	there	is	one	special	word,	
vipaścit,	
which	means	learned	or
with	knowledge.The	soul	is	full	of	knowledge,	or	full	always	with	consciousness.	Therefore,
consciousness	is	the	symptom	of	the	soul.	Even	if	one	does	not	find	the	soul
within	the	heart,	where	he	is	situated,	one	can	still	understand	the	presence	of
the	soul	simply	by	the	presence	of	consciousness.	Sometimes	we	do	not	find
the	sun	in	the	sky	owing	to	clouds,	or	for	some	other	reason,	but	the	light	of
the	sun	is	always	there,	and	we	are	convinced	that	it	is	therefore	daytime.	As
soon	as	there	is	a	little	light	in	the	sky	early	in	the	morning,	we	can	understand
that	the	sun	is	in	the	sky.	Similarly,	since	there	is	some	consciousness	in	all
bodies
—
whether	man	or	animal
—
we	can	understand	the	presence	of	the	soul.
This	consciousness	of	the	soul	is,	however,	different	from	the	consciousness
of	the	Supreme	because	the	supreme	consciousness	is	all-knowledge–past,
present	and	future.	The	consciousness	of	the	individual	soul	is	prone	to	be
forgetful.	When	he	is	forgetful	of	his	real	nature,	he	obtains	education	and
enlightenment	from	the	superior	lessons	of	Kṛṣṇa.	But	Kṛṣṇa	is	not	like	the
forgetful	soul.	If	so,	Kṛṣṇa's	teachings	of	
Bhagavad-gītā	
would	be	useless.
There	are	two	kinds	of	souls
—
namely	the	minute	particle	soul	(
aṇu-	ātmā)
and	the	Supersoul	(the	
vibhu-ātmā).	
This	is	also	confirmed	in	the	
Kaṭha
Upaniṣad
	in	this	way:
aṇor	aṇīyān	mahato	mahīyān
ātmāsya	jantor	nihito	guhāyām
tam	akratuḥ	paśyati	vīta-śoko
dhātuḥ	prasādān	mahimānam	ātmanaḥ
(Kaṭha	1.2.20)
"Both	the	Supersoul	
[Paramātmā]	
and	the	atomic	soul	
[jīvātmā]	
are	situated
on	the	same	tree	of	the	body	within	the	same	heart	of	the	living	being,	and
only	one	who	has	become	free	from	all	material	desires	as	well	as
lamentations	can,	by	the	grace	of	the	Supreme,	understand	the	glories	of	the
soul."	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	fountainhead	of	the	Supersoul	also,	as	it	will	be	disclosed
in	the	following	chapters,	and	Arjuna	is	the	atomic	soul,	forgetful	of	his	real
nature;	therefore	he	requires	to	be	enlightened	by	Kṛṣṇa,	or	by	His	bona	fide
representative	(the	spiritual	master).
TEXT	21
व े द ा ि व न ा ि श न ं
	
ि न ᇰ य ं
	
य
	
ए न म ज म ᇼ य य म ्
	
।
क थ ं
	
स
	
प ु ኄ ष ः
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
क ं
	
घ ा त य ि त
	
ह ि ᇳ त
	
क म ्
	
॥
२ १
॥vedāvināśinaṁ	nityaṁ
ya	enam	ajam	avyayam
kathaṁ	sa	puruṣaḥ	pārtha
kaṁ	ghātayati	hanti	kam
veda—
in	knowledge;	
avināśinam—
indestructible;	
nityam—
always;	
yaḥ—
one	who;	
enam—
this	(soul);	
ajam—
unborn;	
avyayam—
immutable;	
katham—
how;	
saḥ—
he;	
puruṣaḥ—
person;	
pārtha
—O	Pārtha	(Arjuna);	
kam—
whom;
ghātayati—
hurts;	
hanti—
kills;	
kam—
whom.
TRANSLATION
O	Pārtha,	how	can	a	person	who	knows	that	the	soul	is	indestructible,
unborn,	eternal	and	immutable,	kill	anyone	or	cause	anyone	to	kill?
PURPORT
Everything	has	its	proper	utility,	and	a	man	who	is	situated	in	complete
knowledge	knows	how	and	where	to	apply	a	thing	for	its	proper	utility.
Similarly,	violence	also	has	its	utility,	and	how	to	apply	violence	rests	with	the
person	in	knowledge.	Although	the	justice	of	the	peace	awards	capital
punishment	to	a	person	condemned	for	murder,	the	justice	of	the	peace	cannot
be	blamed	because	he	orders	violence	to	another	person	according	to	the
codes	of	justice.	In	
Manu-saṁhitā,	
the	lawbook	for	mankind,	it	is	supported
that	a	murderer	should	be	condemned	to	death	so	that	in	his	next	life	he	will
not	have	to	suffer	for	the	great	sin	he	has	committed.	Therefore,	the	king's
punishment	of	hanging	a	murderer	is	actually	beneficial.	Similarly,	when
Kṛṣṇa	orders	fighting,	it	must	be	concluded	that	violence	is	for	supreme
justice,	and,	as	such,	Arjuna	should	follow	the	instruction,	knowing	well	that
such	violence,	committed	in	the	act	of	fighting	for	Kṛṣṇa,	is	not	violence	at	all
because,	at	any	rate,	the	man,	or	rather	the	soul,	cannot	be	killed;	so	for	the
administration	of	justice,	so-	called	violence	is	permitted.	A	surgical	operation
is	not	meant	to	kill	the	patient,	but	to	cure	him.	Therefore	the	fighting	to	be
executed	by	Arjuna	at	the	instruction	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	with	full	knowledge,	so	there
is	no	possibility	of	sinful	reaction.
TEXT	22व ा स ा ं ि स
	
ज ी ण ा ᆼ ि न
	
य थ ा
	
ि व ह ा य
न व ा ि न
	
ग ृ ቈ ा ि त
	
न र ो ऽ प र ा ि ण
	
।
त थ ा
	
श र ी र ा ि ण
	
ि व ह ा य
	
ज ी ण ा ᆼ
-
ᇳ य ᇳ य ा ि न
	
स ं य ा ि त
	
न व ा ि न
	
द े ह ी
	
॥
२ २
॥
vāsāṁsi	jīrṇāni	yathā	vihāya
navāni	gṛhṇāti	naro	'parāṇi
tathā	śarīrāṇi	vihāya	jīrṇāny
anyāni	saṁyāti	navāni	dehī
vāsāṁsi—
garments;	
jīrṇāni—
old	and	worn	out;	
yathā—
as	it	is;	
vihāya—
giving	up;	
navāni—
new	garments;	
gṛhṇāti—
does	accept;	
naraḥ—
a	man;
aparāṇi—
other;	
tathā—
in	the	same	way;	
śarīrāṇi—
bodies;	
vihāya—
giving	up;
jīrṇāni—
old	and	useless;	
anyāni—
different;	
saṁyāti—
verily	accepts;	
navāni
—
new	sets;	
dehī—
the	embodied.
TRANSLATION
As	a	person	puts	on	new	garments,	giving	up	old	ones,	similarly,	the
soul	accepts	new	material	bodies,	giving	up	the	old	and	useless	ones.
PURPORT
Change	of	body	by	the	atomic	individual	soul	is	an	accepted	fact.	Even
some	of	the	modern	scientists	who	do	not	believe	in	the	existence	of	the	soul,
but	at	the	same	time	cannot	explain	the	source	of	energy	from	the	heart,	have
to	accept	continuous	changes	of	body	which	appear	from	childhood	to
boyhood	and	from	boyhood	to	youth	and	again	from	youth	to	old	age.	From
old	age,	the	change	is	transferred	to	another	body.	This	has	already	been
explained	in	the	previous	verse.
Transference	of	the	atomic	individual	soul	to	another	body	is	made	possible
by	the	grace	of	the	Supersoul.The	Supersoul	fulfills	the	desire	of	the	atomic
soul	as	one	friend	fulfills	the	desire	of	another.	The	
Vedas,	
like	the	
Muṇḍaka
Upaniṣad,	
as	well	as	the	
Śvetāśvatara	Upaniṣad,	
compare	the	soul	and	the
Supersoul	to	two	friendly	birds	sitting	on	the	same	tree.	One	of	the	birds	(the
individual	atomic	soul)	is	eating	the	fruit	of	the	tree,	and	the	other	bird	(Kṛṣṇa)
is	simply	watching	His	friend.	Of	these	two	birds
—
although	they	are	the	samein	quality
—
one	is	captivated	by	the	fruits	of	the	material	tree,	while	the	other
is	simply	witnessing	the	activities	of	His	friend.	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	witnessing	bird,
and	Arjuna	is	the	eating	bird.	Although	they	are	friends,	one	is	still	the	master
and	the	other	is	the	servant.	Forgetfulness	of	this	relationship	by	the	atomic
soul	is	the	cause	of	one's	changing	his	position	from	one	tree	to	another	or
from	one	body	to	another.	The	
jīva
	soul	is	struggling	very	hard	on	the	tree	of
the	material	body,	but	as	soon	as	he	agrees	to	accept	the	other	bird	as	the
supreme	spiritual	master–as	Arjuna	agreed	to	do	by	voluntary	surrender	unto
Kṛṣṇa	for	instruction–the	subordinate	bird	immediately	becomes	free	from	all
lamentations.	Both	the	
Kaṭha	Upaniṣad	
and	
Śvetāśvatara	Upaniṣad	
confirm
this:
samāne	vṛkṣe	puruṣo	nimagno
'nīśayā	śocati	muhyamānaḥ
juṣṭaṁ	yadā	paśyaty	anyam	īśam	asya
mahimānam	iti	vīta-śokaḥ
"Although	the	two	birds	are	in	the	same	tree,	the	eating	bird	is	fully	engrossed
with	anxiety	and	moroseness	as	the	enjoyer	of	the	fruits	of	the	tree.	But	if	in
some	way	or	other	he	turns	his	face	to	his	friend	who	is	the	Lord	and	knows
His	glories–at	once	the	suffering	bird	becomes	free	from	all	anxieties."	Arjuna
has	now	turned	his	face	towards	his	eternal	friend,	Kṛṣṇa,	and	is
understanding	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
from	Him.	And	thus,	hearing	from	Kṛṣṇa,	he
can	understand	the	supreme	glories	of	the	Lord	and	be	free	from	lamentation.
Arjuna	is	advised	herewith	by	the	Lord	not	to	lament	for	the	bodily	change
of	his	old	grandfather	and	his	teacher.	He	should	rather	be	happy	to	kill	their
bodies	in	the	righteous	fight	so	that	they	may	be	cleansed	at	once	of	all
reactions	from	various	bodily	activities.	One	who	lays	down	his	life	on	the
sacrificial	altar,	or	in	the	proper	battlefield,	is	at	once	cleansed	of	bodily
reactions	and	promoted	to	a	higher	status	of	life.	So	there	was	no	cause	for
Arjuna's	lamentation.
TEXT	23
न ै न ं
	
ि छ ᇳ द ि ᇳ त
	
श ᇿ त ् र ा ि ण
	
न ै न ं
	
द ह ि त
	
प ा व क ः
	
।
न
	
च ै न ं
	
ᇧ ल े द य ᇳ ᇰ य ा प ो
	
न
	
श ो ष य ि त
	
म ा ኄ त ः
	
॥
२ ३
॥
nainaṁ	chindanti	śastrāṇinainaṁ	dahati	pāvakaḥ
na	cainaṁ	kledayanty	āpo
na	śoṣayati	mārutaḥ
na—
never;	
enam—
unto	this	soul;	
chindanti—
can	cut	into	pieces;	
śastrāṇi
—
all	weapons;	
na—
never;	
enam—
unto	this	soul;	
dahati—
burns;	
pāvakaḥ—
fire;	
na—
never;	
ca—
also;	
enam—
unto	this	soul;	
kledayanti—
moistens;	
āpaḥ
—water;	
na—
never;	
śoṣayati—
dries;	
mārutaḥ—
wind.
TRANSLATION
The	soul	can	never	be	cut	into	pieces	by	any	weapon,	nor	can	he	be
burned	by	fire,	nor	moistened	by	water,	nor	withered	by	the	wind.
PURPORT
All	kinds	of	weapons,	swords,	flames,	rains,	tornadoes,	etc.,	are	unable	to
kill	the	spirit	soul.	It	appears	that	there	were	many	kinds	of	weapons	made	of
earth,	water,	air,	ether,	etc.,	in	addition	to	the	modern	weapons	of	fire.	Even
the	nuclear	weapons	of	the	modern	age	are	classified	as	fire	weapons,	but
formerly	there	were	other	weapons	made	of	all	different	types	of	material
elements.	Firearms	were	counteracted	by	water	weapons,	which	are	now
unknown	to	modern	science.	Nor	do	modern	scientists	have	knowledge	of
tornado	weapons.	Nonetheless,	the	soul	can	never	be	cut	into	pieces,	nor
annihilated	by	any	number	of	weapons,	regardless	of	scientific	devices.
Nor	was	it	ever	possible	to	cut	the	individual	souls	from	the	original	Soul.
The	Māyāvādī,	however,	cannot	describe	how	the	individual	soul	evolved
from	ignorance	and	consequently	became	covered	by	illusory	energy.	Because
they	are	atomic	individual	souls	
(sanātana)	
eternally,	they	are	prone	to	be
covered	by	the	illusory	energy,	and	thus	they	become	separated	from	the
association	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	just	as	the	sparks	of	the	fire,	although	one	in
quality	with	the	fire,	are	prone	to	be	extinguished	when	out	of	the	fire.	In	the
Varāha	Purāṇa,	
the	living	entities	are	described	as	separated	parts	and	parcels
of	the	Supreme.	They	are	eternally	so,	according	to	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
also.
So,	even	after	being	liberated	from	illusion,	the	living	entity	remains	a
separate	identity,	as	is	evident	from	the	teachings	of	the	Lord	to	Arjuna.
Arjuna	became	liberated	by	the	knowledge	received	from	Kṛṣṇa,	but	he	neverbecame	one	with	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	24
अ ᇫ छ े ሱ ो ऽ य म द ा ቋ ो ऽ य म ᇧ ल े ሱ ो ऽ श ो ᇾ य
	
ए व
	
च
	
।
ि न ᇰ य ः
	
स व ᆼ ग त ः
	
ᇿ थ ा ण ु र च ल ो ऽ य ं
	
स न ा त न ः
	
॥
२ ४
॥
acchedyo	'yam	adāhyo	'yam
akledyo	'śoṣya	eva	ca
nityaḥ	sarva-gataḥ	sthāṇur
acalo	'yaṁ	sanātanaḥ
acchedyaḥ—
unbreakable;	
ayam—
this	soul;	
adāhyaḥ—
cannot	be	burned;
ayam—
this	soul;	
akledyaḥ—
insoluble;	
aśoṣyaḥ—
cannot	be	dried;	
eva
—
certainly;	
ca—
and;	
nityaḥ—
everlasting;	
sarva-gataḥ—
all-pervading;
sthāṇuḥ—	
unchangeable;	
acalaḥ—
immovable;	
ayam—
this	soul;	
sanātanaḥ
—
eternally	the	same.
TRANSLATION
This	individual	soul	is	unbreakable	and	insoluble,	and	can	be	neither
burned	nor	dried.	He	is	everlasting,	all-pervading,	unchangeable,
immovable	and	eternally	the	same.
PURPORT
All	these	qualifications	of	the	atomic	soul	definitely	prove	that	the
individual	soul	is	eternally	the	atomic	particle	of	the	spirit	whole,	and	he
remains	the	same	atom	eternally,	without	change.	The	theory	of	monism	is
very	difficult	to	apply	in	this	case,	because	the	individual	soul	is	never
expected	to	become	one	homogeneously.	After	liberation	from	material
contamination,	the	atomic	soul	may	prefer	to	remain	as	a	spiritual	spark	in	the
effulgent	rays	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	but	the	intelligent	souls
enter	into	the	spiritual	planets	to	associate	with	the	Personality	of	Godhead.
The	word	
sarva-gataḥ
	(all-pervading)	is	significant	because	there	is	no
doubt	that	living	entities	are	all	over	God's	creation.	They	live	on	the	land,	inthe	water,	in	the	air,	within	the	earth	and	even	within	fire.	The	belief	that	they
are	sterilized	in	fire	is	not	acceptable,	because	it	is	clearly	stated	here	that	the
soul	cannot	be	burned	by	fire.	Therefore,	there	is	no	doubt	that	there	are	living
entities	also	in	the	sun	planet	with	suitable	bodies	to	live	there.	If	the	sun
globe	is	uninhabited,	then	the	word	
sarva-gataḥ
–living	everywhere–becomes
meaningless.
TEXT	25
अ ᇼ य ᇧ त ो ऽ य म ि च ᇳ ᇰ य ो ऽ य म ि व क ा य ो ᆼ ऽ य म ु ᇫ य त े
	
।
त ᇿ म ा द े व ं
	
ि व ि द ᇰ व ै न ं
	
न ा न ु श ो ि च त ु म ह ᆼ ि स
	
॥
२ ५
॥
avyakto	'yam	acintyo	'yam
avikāryo	'yam	ucyate
tasmād	evaṁ	viditvainaṁ
nānuśocitum	arhasi
avyaktaḥ—
invisible;	
ayam—
this	soul;	
acintyaḥ—
inconceivable;	
ayam—
this	soul;	
avikāryaḥ—
unchangeable;	
ayam—
this	soul;	
ucyate—
is	said;	
tasmāt
—
therefore;	
evam—
like	this;	
viditvā—
knowing	it	well;	
enam—
this	soul;	
na—
do	not;	
anuśocitum—
may	lament	over;	
arhasi—
you	deserve.
TRANSLATION
It	is	said	that	the	soul	is	invisible,	inconceivable,	immutable,	and
unchangeable.	Knowing	this,	you	should	not	grieve	for	the	body.
PURPORT
As	described	previously,	the	magnitude	of	the	soul	is	so	small	for	our
material	calculation	that	he	cannot	be	seen	even	by	the	most	powerful
microscope;	therefore,	he	is	invisible.	As	far	as	the	soul's	existence	is
concerned,	no	one	can	establish	his	existence	experimentally	beyond	the	proof
of	
śruti	
or	Vedic	wisdom.	We	have	to	accept	this	truth,	because	there	is	no
other	source	of	understanding	the	existence	of	the	soul,	although	it	is	a	fact	by
perception.	There	are	many	things	we	have	to	accept	solely	on	grounds	ofsuperior	authority.	No	one	can	deny	the	existence	of	his	father,	based	upon	the
authority	of	his	mother.	There	is	no	other	source	of	understanding	the	identity
of	the	father	except	by	the	authority	of	the	mother.	Similarly,	there	is	no	other
source	of	understanding	the	soul	except	by	studying	the	
Vedas.	
In	other	words,
the	soul	is	inconceivable	by	human	experimental	knowledge.	The	soul	is
consciousness	and	conscious–that	also	is	the	statement	of	the	
Vedas,	
and	we
have	to	accept	that.	Unlike	the	bodily	changes,	there	is	no	change	in	the	soul.
As	eternally	unchangeable,	the	soul	remains	atomic	in	comparison	to	the
infinite	Supreme	Soul.	The	Supreme	Soul	is	infinite,	and	the	atomic	soul	is
infinitesimal.	Therefore,	the	infinitesimal	soul,	being	unchangeable,	can	never
become	equal	to	the	infinite	soul,	or	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.
This	concept	is	repeated	in	the	
Vedas	
in	different	ways	just	to	confirm	the
stability	of	the	conception	of	the	soul.	Repetition	of	something	is	necessary	in
order	that	we	understand	the	matter	thoroughly	without	error.
TEXT	26
अ थ
	
च ै न ं
	
ि न ᇰ य ज ा त ं
	
ि न ᇰ य ं
	
व ा
	
म ᇳ य स े
	
म ृ त म ्
	
।
त थ ा ि प
	
ᇰ व ं
	
म ह ा ब ा ह ो
	
न ै व ं
	
श ो ि च त ु म ह ᆼ ि स
	
॥
२ ६
॥
atha	cainaṁ	nitya-jātaṁ
nityaṁ	vā	manyase	mṛtam
tathāpi	tvaṁ	mahā-bāho
nainaṁ	śocitum	arhasi
atha—
if,	however;	
ca—
also;	
enam—
this	soul;	
nitya-jātam—
always	born;
nityam—
forever;	
vā—
either;	
manyase—
so	think;	
mṛtam—
dead;	
tathāpi—
still;
tvam—
you;
	mahā-bāho—
O	mighty-armed	one;	
na—
never;	
enam—
about	the
soul;	
śocitum—
to	lament;	
arhasi—
deserve.
TRANSLATION
If,	however,	you	think	that	the	soul	is	perpetually	born	and	always	dies,
still	you	have	no	reason	to	lament,	O	mighty-armed.
PURPORTThere	is	always	a	class	of	philosophers,	almost	akin	to	the	Buddhists,	who
do	not	believe	in	the	separate	existence	of	the	soul	beyond	the	body.	When
Lord	Kṛṣṇa	spoke	the	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
it	appears	that	such	philosophers
existed,	and	they	were	known	as	the	
Lokāyatikas	
and	
Vaibhāṣikas.	
These
philosophers	maintained	that	life	symptoms,	or	soul,	takes	place	at	a	certain
mature	condition	of	material	combination.	The	modern	material	scientist	and
materialist	philosophers	also	think	similarly.	According	to	them,	the	body	is	a
combination	of	physical	elements,	and	at	a	certain	stage	the	life	symptoms
develop	by	interaction	of	the	physical	and	chemical	elements.	The	science	of
anthropology	is	based	on	this	philosophy.	Currently,	many	pseudo-religions–
now	becoming	fashionable	in	America–are	also	adhering	to	this	philosophy,	as
well	as	to	the	nihilistic	nondevotional	Buddhist	sects.
Even	if	Arjuna	did	not	believe	in	the	existence	of	the	soul
—
as	in	the
Vaibhāṣika	
philosophy
—
there	would	still	have	been	no	cause	for	lamentation.
No	one	laments	the	loss	of	a	certain	bulk	of	chemicals	and	stops	discharging
his	prescribed	duty.	On	the	other	hand,	in	modern	science	and	scientific
warfare,	so	many	tons	of	chemicals	are	wasted	for	achieving	victory	over	the
enemy.	According	to	the	
Vaibhāṣika	
philosophy,	the	so-called	soul	or	
ātmā
vanishes	along	with	the	deterioration	of	the	body.	So,	in	any	case,	whether
Arjuna	accepted	the	Vedic	conclusion	that	there	is	an	atomic	soul,	or	whether
he	did	not	believe	in	the	existence	of	the	soul,	he	had	no	reason	to	lament.
According	to	this	theory,	since	there	are	so	many	living	entities	generating	out
of	matter	every	moment,	and	so	many	of	them	are	being	vanquished	every
moment,	there	is	no	need	to	grieve	for	such	an	incidence.	However,	since	he
was	not	risking	rebirth	of	the	soul,	Arjuna	had	no	reason	to	be	afraid	of	being
affected	with	sinful	reactions	due	to	his	killing	his	grandfather	and	teacher.
But	at	the	same	time,	Kṛṣṇa	sarcastically	addressed	Arjuna	as	
mahā-bāhu,
mighty-armed,	because	He,	at	least,	did	not	accept	the	theory	of	the
Vaibhāṣikas,	
which	leaves	aside	the	Vedic	wisdom.	As	a	
kṣatriya,	
Arjuna
belonged	to	the	Vedic	culture,	and	it	behooved	him	to	continue	to	follow	its
principles.
TEXT	27
ज ा त ᇿ य
	
ि ह
	
ध ् ኄ व ो
	
म ृ ᇰ य ु ध ् ኄ ᆼ व ं
	
ज ᇳ म
	
म ृ त ᇿ य
	
च
	
।
त ᇿ म ा द प ि र ह ा य ᆹ ऽ थ ᆹ
	
न
	
ᇰ व ं
	
श ो ि च त ु म ह ᆼ ि स
	
॥
२ ७
॥jātasya	hi	dhruvo	mṛtyur
dhruvaṁ	janma	mṛtasya	ca
tasmād	aparihārye	'rthe
na	tvaṁ	śocitum	arhasi
jātasya—
one	who	has	taken	his	birth;	
hi—
certainly;	
dhruvaḥ—
a	fact;
mṛtyuḥ—
death;	
dhruvam—
it	is	also	a	fact;	
janma—
birth;	
mṛtasya—
of	the
dead;	
ca—
also;	
tasmāt—
therefore;	
aparihārye—
for	that	which	is	unavoidable;
arthe—
in	the	matter	of;	
na—
do	not;	
tvam—
you;	
śocitum—
to	lament;	
arhasi
—
deserve.
TRANSLATION
For	one	who	has	taken	his	birth,	death	is	certain;	and	for	one	who	is
dead,	birth	is	certain.	Therefore,	in	the	unavoidable	discharge	of	your
duty,	you	should	not	lament.
PURPORT
One	has	to	take	birth	according	to	one's	activities	of	life.	And,	after
finishing	one	term	of	activities,	one	has	to	die	to	take	birth	for	the	next.	In	this
way	the	cycle	of	birth	and	death	is	revolving,	one	after	the	other	without
liberation.	This	cycle	of	birth	and	death	does	not,	however,	support
unnecessary	murder,	slaughter	and	war.	But	at	the	same	time,	violence	and
war	are	inevitable	factors	in	human	society	for	keeping	law	and	order.
The	Battle	of	Kurukṣetra,	being	the	will	of	the	Supreme,	was	an	inevitable
event,	and	to	fight	for	the	right	cause	is	the	duty	of	a	
kṣatriya.	
Why	should	he
be	afraid	of	or	aggrieved	at	the	death	of	his	relatives	since	he	was	discharging
his	proper	duty?	He	did	not	deserve	to	break	the	law,	thereby	becoming
subjected	to	the	reactions	of	sinful	acts,	of	which	he	was	so	afraid.	By
avoiding	the	discharge	of	his	proper	duty,	he	would	not	be	able	to	stop	the
death	of	his	relatives,	and	he	would	be	degraded	due	to	his	selection	of	the
wrong	path	of	action.
TEXT	28अ ᇼ य ᇧ त ा द ी ि न
	
भ ू त ा ि न
	
ᇼ य ᇧ त म ᇲ य ा ि न
	
भ ा र त
	
।
अ ᇼ य ᇧ त ि न ध न ा ᇳ य े व
	
त त ् र
	
क ा
	
प ि र द े व न ा
	
॥
२ ८
॥
avyaktādīni	bhūtāni
vyakta-madhyāni	bhārata
avyakta-nidhanāny	eva
tatra	kā	paridevanā
avyaktādīni—
in	the	beginning	unmanifested;	
bhūtāni—
all	that	are	created;
vyakta—
manifested;	
madhyāni—
in	the	middle;	
bhārata—
O	descendant	of
Bharata;	
avyakta—
nonmanifested;	
nidhanāni—
all	that	are	vanquished;	
eva—
it	is	all	like	that;	
tatra—
therefore;	kā-what;	
paridevanā—
lamentation.
TRANSLATION
All	created	beings	are	unmanifest	in	their	beginning,	manifest	in	their
interim	state,	and	unmanifest	again	when	they	are	annihilated.	So	what
need	is	there	for	lamentation?
PURPORT
Accepting	that	there	are	two	classes	of	philosophers,	one	believing	in	the
existence	of	soul	and	the	other	not	believing	in	the	existence	of	the	soul,	there
is	no	cause	for	lamentation	in	either	case.	Nonbelievers	in	the	existence	of	the
soul	are	called	atheists	by	followers	of	Vedic	wisdom.	Yet	even	if,	for
argument's	sake,	we	accept	the	atheistic	theory,	there	is	still	no	cause	for
lamentation.	Apart	from	the	separate	existence	of	the	soul,	the	material
elements	remain	unmanifested	before	creation.	From	this	subtle	state	of
unmanifestation	comes	manifestation,	just	as	from	ether,	air	is	generated;	from
air,	fire	is	generated;	from	fire,	water	is	generated;	and	from	water,	earth
becomes	manifested.	From	the	earth,	many	varieties	of	manifestations	take
place.	Take,	for	example,	a	big	skyscraper	manifested	from	the	earth.	When	it
is	dismantled,	the	manifestation	becomes	again	unmanifested	and	remains	as
atoms	in	the	ultimate	stage.	The	law	of	conservation	of	energy	remains,	but	in
course	of	time	things	are	manifested	and	unmanifested–that	is	the	difference.
Then	what	cause	is	there	for	lamentation	either	in	the	stage	of	manifestation	or
unmanifestation?	Somehow	or	other,	even	in	the	unmanifested	stage,	thingsare	not	lost.	Both	at	the	beginning	and	at	the	end,	all	elements	remain
unmanifested,	and	only	in	the	middle	are	they	manifested,	and	this	does	not
make	any	real	material	difference.
And	if	we	accept	the	Vedic	conclusion	as	stated	in	the	
Bhagavad-	gītā
(antavanta	ime	dehāḥ)	
that	these	material	bodies	are	perishable	in	due	course
of	time	
(nityasyoktāḥ	śarīriṇaḥ)	
but	that	soul	is	eternal,	then	we	must
remember	always	that	the	body	is	like	a	dress;	therefore	why	lament	the
changing	of	a	dress?	The	material	body	has	no	factual	existence	in	relation	to
the	eternal	soul.	It	is	something	like	a	dream.	In	a	dream	we	may	think	of
flying	in	the	sky,	or	sitting	on	a	chariot	as	a	king,	but	when	we	wake	up	we
can	see	that	we	are	neither	in	the	sky	nor	seated	on	the	chariot.	The	Vedic
wisdom	encourages	self-realization	on	the	basis	of	the	nonexistence	of	the
material	body.	Therefore,	in	either	case,	whether	one	believes	in	the	existence
of	the	soul,	or	one	does	not	believe	in	the	existence	of	the	soul,	there	is	no
cause	for	lamentation	for	loss	of	the	body.
TEXT	29
आ ᇽ च य ᆼ व ᇰ प ᇽ य ि त
	
क ि ᇽ च द े न
-
म ा ᇽ च य ᆼ व ሲ द ि त
	
त थ ै व
	
च ा ᇳ य ः
	
।
आ ᇽ च य ᆼ व ᇫ च ै न म ᇳ य ः
	
श ृ ण ो ि त
	
श ् ኄ ᇰ व ा ᇴ य े न ं
	
व े द
	
न
	
च ै व
	
क ि ᇽ च त ्
	
॥
२ ९
॥
āścaryavat	paśyati	kaścid	enam
āścaryavad	vadati	tathaiva	cānyaḥ
āścaryavac	cainam	anyaḥ	śṛṇoti
śrutvāpy	enaṁ	veda	na	caiva	kaścit
āścaryavat—
amazing;	
paśyati—
see;	
kaścit—
some;	
enam—
this	soul;
āścaryavat—
amazing;	
vadati—
speak;	
tathā—
there;	
eva—
certainly;	
ca—
also;
anyaḥ	
—others;	
āścaryavat—
similarly	amazing;	
ca—
also;	
enam—
this	soul;
anyaḥ—	
others;	
śṛṇoti—
hear;	
śrutvā—
having	heard;	
api—
even;	
enam—
this
soul;	
veda	
—do	know;	
na—
never;	
ca—
and;	
eva—
certainly;	
kaścit—
anyone.
TRANSLATION
Some	look	on	the	soul	as	amazing,	some	describe	him	as	amazing,	andsome	hear	of	him	as	amazing,	while	others,	even	after	hearing	about	him,
cannot	understand	him	at	all.
PURPORT
Since	
Gītopaniṣad
	is	largely	based	on	the	principles	of	the	
Upaniṣads,	
it	is
not	surprising	to	also	find	this	passage	in	the	
Kaṭha	Upaniṣad.
śravaṇāyāpi	bahubhir	yo	na	labhyaḥ
śṛṇvanto	'pi	bahavo	yaḥ	na	vidyuḥ
āścaryo	vaktā	kuśalo	'sya	labdhā
āścaryo	jñātā	kuśalānuśiṣṭaḥ.
The	fact	that	the	atomic	soul	is	within	the	body	of	a	gigantic	animal,	in	the
body	of	a	gigantic	banyan	tree,	and	also	in	the	microbic	germs,	millions	and
billions	of	which	occupy	only	an	inch	of	space,	is	certainly	very	amazing.
Men	with	a	poor	fund	of	knowledge	and	men	who	are	not	austere	cannot
understand	the	wonders	of	the	individual	atomic	spark	of	spirit,	even	though	it
is	explained	by	the	greatest	authority	of	knowledge,	who	imparted	lessons
even	to	Brahmā,	the	first	living	being	in	the	universe.	Owing	to	a	gross
material	conception	of	things,	most	men	in	this	age	cannot	imagine	how	such
a	small	particle	can	become	both	so	great	and	so	small.	So	men	look	at	the
soul	proper	as	wonderful	either	by	constitution	or	by	description.	Illusioned	by
the	material	energy,	people	are	so	engrossed	in	subject	matter	for	sense
gratification	that	they	have	very	little	time	to	understand	the	question	of	self-
understanding,	even	though	it	is	a	fact	that	without	this	self-understanding	all
activities	result	in	ultimate	defeat	in	the	struggle	for	existence.	Perhaps	one
has	no	idea	that	one	must	think	of	the	soul,	and	also	make	a	solution	of	the
material	miseries.
Some	people	who	are	inclined	to	hear	about	the	soul	may	be	attending
lectures,	in	good	association,	but	sometimes,	owing	to	ignorance,	they	are
misguided	by	acceptance	of	the	Supersoul	and	the	atomic	soul	as	one	without
distinction	of	magnitude.	It	is	very	difficult	to	find	a	man	who	perfectly
understands	the	position	of	the	soul,	the	Supersoul,	the	atomic	soul,	their
respective	functions,	relationships	and	all	other	major	and	minor	details.	And
it	is	still	more	difficult	to	find	a	man	who	has	actually	derived	full	benefit
from	knowledge	of	the	soul,	and	who	is	able	to	describe	the	position	of	the
soul	in	different	aspects.	But	if,	somehow	or	other,	one	is	able	to	understandthe	subject	matter	of	the	soul,	then	one's	life	is	successful.	The	easiest	process
for	understanding	the	subject	matter	of	self,	however,	is	to	accept	the
statements	of	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
spoken	by	the	greatest	authority,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,
without	being	deviated	by	other	theories.	But	it	also	requires	a	great	deal	of
penance	and	sacrifice,	either	in	this	life	or	in	the	previous	ones,	before	one	is
able	to	accept	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Kṛṣṇa	can,
however,	be	known	as	such	by	the	causeless	mercy	of	the	pure	devotee	and	by
no	other	way.
TEXT	30
द े ह ी
	
ि न ᇰ य म व ᇲ य ो ऽ य ं
	
द े ह े
	
स व ᆼ ᇿ य
	
भ ा र त
	
।
त ᇿ म ा ᇰ स व ा ᆼ ि ण
	
भ ू त ा ि न
	
न
	
ᇰ व ं
	
श ो ि च त ु म ह ᆼ ि स
	
॥
३ ०
॥
dehī	nityam	avadhyo	'yaṁ
dehe	sarvasya	bhārata
tasmāt	sarvāṇi	bhūtāni
na	tvaṁ	śocitum	arhasi
dehī—
the	owner	of	the	material	body;	
nityam—
eternally;	
avadhyaḥ—
cannot	be	killed;	
ayam—
this	soul;	
dehe—
in	the	body;	
sarvasya—
of	everyone;
bhārata
—O	descendant	of	Bharata;	
tasmāt—
therefore;	
sarvāṇi—
all;	
bhūtāni
—
living	entities	(that	are	born);	
na—
never;	
tvam—
yourself;	
śocitum	
—to
lament;	
arhasi-	
deserve.
TRANSLATION
O	descendant	of	Bharata,	he	who	dwells	in	the	body	is	eternal	and	can
never	be	slain.	Therefore	you	need	not	grieve	for	any	creature.
PURPORT
The	Lord	now	concludes	the	chapter	of	instruction	on	the	immutable	spirit
soul.	In	describing	the	immortal	soul	in	various	ways,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	establishes
that	the	soul	is	immortal	and	the	body	is	temporary.	Therefore	Arjuna	as	a
kṣatriya	
should	not	abandon	his	duty	out	of	fear	that	his	grandfather	andteacher–Bhīṣma	and	Droṇa–will	die	in	the	battle.	On	the	authority	of	Śrī
Kṛṣṇa,	one	has	to	believe	that	there	is	a	soul	different	from	the	material	body,
not	that	there	is	no	such	thing	as	soul,	or	that	living	symptoms	develop	at	a
certain	stage	of	material	maturity	resulting	from	the	interaction	of	chemicals.
Though	the	soul	is	immortal,	violence	is	not	encouraged,	but	at	the	time	of
war	it	is	not	discouraged	when	there	is	actual	need	for	it.	That	need	must	be
justified	in	terms	of	the	sanction	of	the	Lord,	and	not	capriciously.
TEXT	31
ᇿ व ध म ᆼ म ि प
	
च ा व े ቎ य
	
न
	
ि व क ि ᇸ प त ु म ह ᆼ ि स
	
।
ध ᇸ य ा ᆼ द ् ि ध
	
य ु ሬ ा ᇫ छ ् र े य ो ऽ ᇳ य ᇰ ᇤ ि त ् र य ᇿ य
	
न
	
ि व ሱ त े
	
॥
३ १
॥
svadharmam	api	cāvekṣya
na	vikampitum	arhasi
dharmyāddhi	yuddhāc	chreyo	'nyat
kṣatriyasya	na	vidyate
svadharmam—
one's	own	religious	principles;	
api—
also;	
ca—
indeed;
avekṣya—
considering;	
na—
never;	
vikampitum—
to	hesitate;	
arhasi—
you
deserve
;	dharmyāt—
from	religious	principles;	
hi—
indeed;	
yuddhāt—
of
fighting;	
śreyaḥ—
better	engagements;	
anyat—
anything	else;	
kṣatriyasya—
of
the	
kṣatriya
;	
na—
does	not;	
vidyate—
exist.
TRANSLATION
Considering	your	specific	duty	as	a	kṣatriya,	you	should	know	that
there	is	no	better	engagement	for	you	than	fighting	on	religious
principles;	and	so	there	is	no	need	for	hesitation.
PURPORT
Out	of	the	four	orders	of	social	administration,	the	second	order,	for	the
matter	of	good	administration,	is	called	
kṣatriya.	Kṣat	
means	hurt.	One	who
gives	protection	from	harm	is	called	
kṣatriya	(trayate
–to	give	protection).	The
kṣatriyas	
are	trained	for	killing	in	the	forest.	A	
kṣatriya	
would	go	into	theforest	and	challenge	a	tiger	face	to	face	and	fight	with	the	tiger	with	his	sword.
When	the	tiger	was	killed,	it	would	be	offered	the	royal	order	of	cremation.
This	system	is	being	followed	even	up	to	the	present	day	by	the	
kṣatriya	
kings
of	Jaipur	state.	The	
kṣatriyas	
are	specially	trained	for	challenging	and	killing
because	religious	violence	is	sometimes	a	necessary	factor.	Therefore,
kṣatriyas	
are	never	meant	for	accepting	directly	the	order	of	
sannyāsa	
or
renunciation.	Nonviolence	in	politics	may	be	a	diplomacy,	but	it	is	never	a
factor	or	principle.	In	the	religious	law	books	it	is	stated:
āhaveṣu	mitho	'nyonyaṁ	jighāṁsanto	mahīkṣitaḥ
yuddhamānāḥ	paraṁ	śaktyā	svargaṁ	yānty	aparāṅmukhāḥ
yajñeṣu	paśavo	brahman	hanyante	satataṁ	dvijaiḥ
saṁskṛtāḥ	kila	mantraiś	ca	te	'pi	svargam	avāpnuvan.
"In	the	battlefield,	a	king	or	
kṣatriya,	
while	fighting	another	king	envious	of
him,	is	eligible	for	achieving	heavenly	planets	after	death,	as	the	
brāhmaṇas
also	attain	the	heavenly	planets	by	sacrificing	animals	in	the	sacrificial	fire."
Therefore,	killing	on	the	battle	on	the	religious	principle	and	the	killing	of
animals	in	the	sacrificial	fire	are	not	at	all	considered	to	be	acts	of	violence,
because	everyone	is	benefitted	by	the	religious	principles	involved.	The
animal	sacrificed	gets	a	human	life	immediately	without	undergoing	the
gradual	evolutionary	process	from	one	form	to	another,	and	the	
kṣatriyas
killed	in	the	battlefield	also	attain	the	heavenly	planets	as	do	the	
brāhmaṇas
who	attain	them	by	offering	sacrifice.
There	are	two	kinds	of	
svadharmas,	
specific	duties.	As	long	as	one	is	not
liberated,	one	has	to	perform	the	duties	of	that	particular	body	in	accordance
with	religious	principles	in	order	to	achieve	liberation.	When	one	is	liberated,
one's	
svadharma–
specific	duty–becomes	spiritual	and	is	not	in	the	material
bodily	concept.	In	the	bodily	conception	of	life	thereare	specific	duties	for	the
brāhmaṇas	
and	
kṣatriyas	
respectively,	and	such	duties	are	unavoidable.
Svadharma
	is	ordained	by	the	Lord,	and	this	will	be	clarified	in	the	Fourth
Chapter.	On	the	bodily	plane	
svadharma
	is	called	
varṇāśrama-dharma,	
or
man's	steppingstone	for	spiritual	understanding.	Human	civilization	begins
from	the	stage	of	
varṇāśrama-dharma,
	or	specific	duties	in	terms	of	the
specific	modes	of	nature	of	the	body	obtained.	Discharging	one's	specific	duty
in	any	field	of	action	in	accordance	with	
varṇāśrama-	dharma	
serves	to
elevate	one	to	a	higher	status	of	life.TEXT	32
य द ृ ᇫ छ य ा
	
च ो प प ᇳ न ं
	
ᇿ व ग ᆼ ሲ ा र म प ा व ृ त म ्
	
।
स ु ि ख न ः
	
ᇤ ि त ् र य ा ः
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
ल भ ᇳ त े
	
य ु ሬ म ी द ृ श म ्
	
॥
३ २
॥
yadṛcchayā	copapannaṁ
svarga-dvāram	apāvṛtam
sukhinaḥ	kṣatriyāḥ	pārtha
labhante	yuddham	īdṛśam
yadṛcchayā—
by	its	own	accord;	
ca—
also;	
upapannam—
arrived	at;	
svarga
—
heavenly	planet;	
dvāram—
door;	
apāvṛtam—
wide	open;	
sukhinaḥ—
very
happy;	
kṣatriyāḥ—
the	members	of	the	royal	order;	
pārtha—
O	son	of	Pṛthā;
labhante—
do	achieve;	
yuddham—
war;	
īdṛśam—
like	this.
TRANSLATION
O	Pārtha,	happy	are	the	kṣatriyas	to	whom	such	fighting	opportunities
come	unsought,	opening	for	them	the	doors	of	the	heavenly	planets.
PURPORT
As	supreme	teacher	of	the	world,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	condemns	the	attitude	of
Arjuna	who	said,	"I	do	not	find	any	good	in	this	fighting.	It	will	cause
perpetual	habitation	in	hell."	Such	statements	by	Arjuna	were	due	to	ignorance
only.	He	wanted	to	become	nonviolent	in	the	discharge	of	his	specific	duty.
For	a	
kṣatriya	
to	be	in	the	battlefield	and	to	become	nonviolent	is	the
philosophy	of	fools.	In	the	
Parāśara-smṛti	
or	religious	codes	made	by
Parāśara,	the	great	sage	and	father	of	Vyāsadeva,	it	is	stated:
kṣatriyo	hi	prajā	rakṣan	śastra-pāṇiḥ	pradaṇḍayan
nirjitya	parasainyādi	kṣitiṁ	dharmeṇa	pālayet.
"The	
kṣatriya's	
duty	is	to	protect	the	citizens	from	all	kinds	of	difficulties,	and
for	that	reason	he	has	to	apply	violence	in	suitable	cases	for	law	and	order.
Therefore	he	has	to	conquer	the	soldiers	of	inimical	kings,	and	thus,	withreligious	principles,	
he	should	rule	over	the	world."
Considering	all	aspects,	Arjuna	had	no	reason	to	refrain	from	fighting.	If	he
should	conquer	his	enemies,	he	would	enjoy	the	kingdom;	and	if	he	should	die
in	the	battle,	he	would	be	elevated	to	the	heavenly	planets	whose	doors	were
wide	open	to	him.	Fighting	would	be	for	his	benefit	in	either	case.
TEXT	33
अ थ
	
च े ᇰ ᇰ व ि म म ं
	
ध ᇸ य ᆾ
	
स ं ग ् र ा म ं
	
न
	
क ि र ᇾ य ि स
	
।
त त ः
	
ᇿ व ध म ᆾ
	
क ी ि त ᆾ
	
च
	
ि ह ᇰ व ा
	
प ा प म व ा ᇴ ᇿ य ि स
	
॥
३ ३
॥
atha	cet	tvam	imaṁ	dharmyaṁ
saṅgrāmaṁ	na	kariṣyasi
tataḥ	svadharmam	kīrtiṁ	ca
hitvā	pāpam	avāpsyasi
atha—
therefore;	
cet—
if;	
tvam—
you;	
imam—
this;	
dharmyam—
religious
duty;	
saṅgrāmam—
fighting;	
na—
do	not;	
kariṣyasi—
perform;	
tataḥ—
then;
svadharmam—
your	religious	duty;	
kīrtim—
reputation;	
ca—
also;	
hitvā—
losing;	
pāpam—
sinful	reaction;	
avāpsyasi—
do	gain.
TRANSLATION
If,	however,	you	do	not	fight	this	religious	war,	then	you	will	certainly
incur	sins	for	neglecting	your	duties	and	thus	lose	your	reputation	as	a
fighter.
PURPORT
Arjuna	was	a	famous	fighter,	and	he	attained	fame	by	fighting	many	great
demigods,	including	even	Lord	Śiva.	After	fighting	and	defeating	Lord	Śiva	in
the	dress	of	a	hunter,	Arjuna	pleased	the	Lord	and	received	as	a	reward	a
weapon	called	
pāśupata-	astra.	
Everyone	knew	that	he	was	a	great	warrior.
Even	Droṇācārya	gave	him	benediction	and	awarded	him	the	special	weapon
by	which	he	could	kill	even	his	teacher.	So	he	was	credited	with	so	many
military	certificates	from	many	authorities,	including	his	adopted	father	Indra,the	heavenly	king.	But	if	he	abandoned	the	battle,	he	would	not	only	neglect
his	specific	duty	as	a	
kṣatriya,	
but	he	would	lose	all	his	fame	and	good	name
and	thus	prepare	his	royal	road	to	hell.	In	other	words,	he	would	go	to	hell,	not
by	fighting,	but	by	withdrawing	from	battle.
TEXT	34
अ क ी ि त ᆾ
	
च ा ि प
	
भ ू त ा ि न
	
क थ ि य ᇾ य ि ᇳ त
	
त े ऽ ᇼ य य ा म ्
	
।
स ᇸ भ ा ि व त ᇿ य
	
च ा क ी ि त ᆼ म ᆼ र ण ा द ि त ि र ᇫ य त े
	
॥
३ ४
॥
akīrtiṁ	cāpi	bhūtāni
kathayiṣyanti	te	'vyayām
sambhāvitasya	cākīrtir
maraṇād	atiricyate
akīrtim—
infamy;	
ca—
also;	
api—
over	and	above;	
bhūtāni—
all	people;
kathayiṣyanti—
will	speak;	te-of	you;	
avyayām—
forever;	
sambhāvitasya—
for
a	respectable	man;	
ca—
also;	
akīrtiḥ—
ill	fame;	
maraṇāt—
than	death;
atiricyate—
becomes	more	than.
TRANSLATION
People	will	always	speak	of	your	infamy,	and	for	one	who	has	been
honored,	dishonor	is	worse	than	death.
PURPORT
Both	as	friend	and	philosopher	to	Arjuna,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	now	gives	His	final
judgement	regarding	Arjuna's	refusal	to	fight.	The	Lord	says,	"Arjuna,	if	you
leave	the	battlefield,	people	will	call	you	a	coward	even	before	your	actual
flight.	And	if	you	think	that	people	may	call	you	bad	names	but	that	you	will
save	your	life	by	fleeing	the	battlefield,	then	My	advice	is	that	you'd	do	better
to	die	in	the	battle.	For	a	respectable	man	like	you,	ill	fame	is	worse	than
death.	So,	you	should	not	flee	for	fear	of	your	life;	better	to	die	in	the	battle.
That	will	save	you	from	the	ill	fame	of	misusing	My	friendship	and	from
losing	your	prestige	in	society."So,	the	final	judgement	of	the	Lord	was	for	Arjuna	to	die	in	the	battle	and
not	withdraw.TEXT	35
भ य ा द ् र ण ा द ु प र त ं
	
म ं ᇿ य ᇳ त े
	
ᇰ व ा ं
	
म ह ा र थ ा ः
	
।
य े ष ा ं
	
च
	
ᇰ व ं
	
ब ह ु म त ो
	
भ ू ᇰ व ा
	
य ा ᇿ य ि स
	
ल ा घ व म ्
	
॥
३ ५
॥
bhayād	raṇād	uparataṁ
maṁsyante	tvāṁ	mahā-rathāḥ
yeṣāṁ	ca	tvaṁ	bahu-mato
bhūtvā	yāsyasi	lāghavam
bhayāt—
out	of	fear;	
raṇāt—
from	the	battlefield;	
uparatam—
ceased;
maṁsyante—
will	consider;	
tvām—
unto	you;	
mahā-rathāḥ—
the	great	generals;
yeṣām—
of	those	who;	
ca—
also;	
tvam—
you;
	bahu-mataḥ—
in	great	estimation;
bhūtvā—
will	become;	
yāsyasi—
will	go;	
lāghavam—
decreased	in	value.
TRANSLATION
The	great	generals	who	have	highly	esteemed	your	name	and	fame	will
think	that	you	have	left	the	battlefield	out	of	fear	only,	and	thus	they	will
consider	you	a	coward.
PURPORT
Lord	Kṛṣṇa	continued	to	give	His	verdict	to	Arjuna:	"Do	not	think	that	the
great	generals	like	Duryodhana,	Karṇa,	and	other	contemporaries	will	think
that	you	have	left	the	battlefield	out	of	compassion	for	your	brothers	and
grandfather.	They	will	think	that	you	have	left	out	of	fear	for	your	life.	And
thus	their	high	estimation	of	your	personality	will	go	to	hell."
TEXT	36
अ व ा ᇫ य व ा द ा ं ᇽ च
	
ब ह ू ᇳ व ि द ᇾ य ि ᇳ त
	
त व ा ि ह त ा ः
	
।
ि न ᇳ द ᇳ त ᇿ त व
	
स ा म ᇱ य ᆾ
	
त त ो
	
द ु ः ख त र ं
	
न ु
	
ि क म ्
	
॥
३ ६
॥avācya-vādāṁś	ca	bahūn
vadiṣyanti	tavāhitāḥ
nindantas	tava	sāmarthyaṁ
tato	duḥkhataraṁ	nu	kim
avācya—
unkind;	
vādān—
fabricated	words;	
ca—
also;	
bahūn—
many;
vadiṣyanti—
will	say;	
tava—
your;	
ahitāḥ—
enemies;	
nindantaḥ—
while
vilifying;	
tava—
your;	
sāmarthyam—
ability;	
tataḥ—
thereafter;	
duḥkhataram
—
more	painful;	
nu—
of	course;	
kim—
what	is	there.
TRANSLATION
Your	enemies	will	describe	you	in	many	unkind	words	and	scorn	your
ability.	What	could	be	more	painful	for	you?
PURPORT
Lord	Kṛṣṇa	was	astonished	in	the	beginning	at	Arjuna's	uncalled-for	plea
for	compassion,	and	He	described	his	compassion	as	befitting	the	non-
Āryans.	Now	in	so	many	words,	He	has	proved	His	statements	against
Arjuna's	so-called	compassion.
TEXT	37
ह त ो
	
व ा
	
प ् र ा ᇴ ᇿ य ि स
	
ᇿ व ग ᆾ
	
ि ज ᇰ व ा
	
व ा
	
भ ो ቎ य स े
	
म ह ी म ्
	
।
त ᇿ म ा द ु ि ሧ ᇾ ठ
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
य ु ሬ ा य
	
क ृ त ि न ᇽ च य ः
	
॥
३ ७
॥
hato	vā	prāpsyasi	svargaṁ
jitvā	vā	bhokṣyase	mahīm
tasmād	uttiṣṭha	kaunteya
yuddhāya	kṛta-niścayaḥ
hataḥ—
being	killed;	
vā—
either;	
prāpsyasi—
you	gain;	
svargam—
the
heavenly	kingdom;	
jitvā—
by	conquering;	
vā—
or;	
bhokṣyase—
you	enjoy;
mahīm—
the	world;	
tasmāt—
therefore;	
uttiṣṭha—
get	up;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of
Kuntī;	
yuddhāya—
to	fight;	
kṛta—
determination;	
niścayaḥ—
uncertainty.TRANSLATION
O	son	of	Kuntī,	either	you	will	be	killed	on	the	battlefield	and	attain	the
heavenly	planets,	or	you	will	conquer	and	enjoy	the	earthly	kingdom.
Therefore	get	up	and	fight	with	determination.
PURPORT
Even	though	there	was	no	certainty	of	victory	for	Arjuna's	side,	he	still	had
to	fight;	for,	even	being	killed	there,	he	could	be	elevated	into	the	heavenly
planets.
TEXT	38
स ु ख द ु ः ख े
	
स म े
	
क ृ ᇰ व ा
	
ल ा भ ा ल ा भ ौ
	
ज य ा ज य ौ
	
।
त त ो
	
य ु ሬ ा य
	
य ु ᇬ य ᇿ व
	
न ै व ं
	
प ा प म व ा ᇴ ᇿ य ि स
	
॥
३ ८
॥
sukha-duḥkhe	same	kṛtvā
lābhālābhau	jayājayau
tato	yuddhāya	yujyasva
naivaṁ	pāpam	avāpsyasi
sukha—
happiness;	
duḥkhe—
in	distress;	
same—
in	equanimity;	
kṛtvā—	
doing
so;	
lābhālābhau—
both	in	loss	and	profit;	
jayājayau—
both	in	defeat	and
victory;	
tataḥ—
thereafter;	
yuddhāya—
for	the	sake	of	fighting;	
yujyasva—
do
fight;	
na—
never;	
evam—
in	this	way;
	pāpam—
sinful	reaction;	
avāpsyasi
—you
will	gain.
TRANSLATION
Do	thou	fight	for	the	sake	of	fighting,	without	considering	happiness	or
distress,	loss	or	gain,	victory	or	defeat—and,	by	so	doing,	you	shall	never
incur	sin.
PURPORTLord	Kṛṣṇa	now	directly	says	that	Arjuna	should	fight	for	the	sake	of
fighting	because	He	desires	the	battle.	There	is	no	consideration	of	happiness
or	distress,	profit	or	gain,	victory	or	defeat	in	the	activities	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	That	everything	should	be	performed	for	the	sake	of	Kṛṣṇa	is
transcendental	consciousness;	so	there	is	no	reaction	to	material	activities.	He
who	acts	for	his	own	sense	gratification,	either	in	goodness	or	in	passion,	is
subject	to	the	reaction,	good	or	bad.	But	he	who	has	completely	surrendered
himself	in	the	activities	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	no	longer	obliged	to
anyone,	nor	is	he	a	debtor	to	anyone,	as	one	is	in	the	ordinary	course	of
activities.	It	is	said:
devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ	pitṝṇāṁ
na	kiṅkaro	nāyamṛṇī	ca	rājan
sarvātmanā	yaḥ	śaraṇaṁ	śaraṇyaṁ
gato	mukundaṁ	parihṛtya	kartam
(Bhāg.	11.5.41)
"Anyone	who	has	completely	surrendered	unto	Kṛṣṇa,	Mukunda,	giving	up	all
other	duties,	is	no	longer	a	debtor,	nor	is	he	obliged	to	anyone–not	the
demigods,	nor	the	sages,	nor	the	people	in	general,	nor	kinsmen,	nor
humanity,	nor	forefathers."	That	is	the	indirect	hint	given	by	Kṛṣṇa	to	Arjuna
in	this	verse,	and	the	matter	will	be	more	clearly	explained	in	the	following
verses.
TEXT	39
ए ष ा
	
त े ऽ ि भ ि ह त ा
	
स ा ङ ् ᇨ य े
	
ब ु द ् ि ध य ो ᆼ ग े
	
ि ᇰ व म ा ं
	
श ृ ण ु
	
।
ब ु ሬ ᆸ ा
	
य ु ᇧ त ो
	
य य ा
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
क म ᆼ ब ᇳ ध ं
	
प ् र ह ा ᇿ य ि स
	
॥
३ ९
॥
eṣā	te	'bhihitā	sāṅkhye
buddhir	yoge	tv	imāṁ	śṛṇu
buddhyā	yukto	yayā	pārtha
karma-bandhaṁ	prahāsyasi
eṣā—
all	these;	
te—
unto	you;	
abhihitā—
described;	
sāṅkhye—
by	analytical
study;	
buddhiḥ—
intelligence;	
yoge—
work	without	fruitive	result;	
tu—
but;imām-this;	
śṛṇu—
just	hear;	
buddhyā—
by	intelligence;	
yuktaḥ—
dovetailed;
yayā—
by	which;	
pārtha—
O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
karma-bandham—
bondage	of
reaction;	
prahāsyasi—
you	can	be	released	from.
TRANSLATION
Thus	far	I	have	declared	to	you	the	analytical	knowledge	of	sāṅkhya
philosophy.	Now	listen	to	the	knowledge	of	yoga	whereby	one	works
without	fruitive	result.	O	son	of	Pṛthā,	when	you	act	by	such	intelligence,
you	can	free	yourself	from	the	bondage	of	works.
PURPORT
According	to	the	
Nirukti,	
or	the	Vedic	dictionary,	
saṅkhya
	means	that	which
describes	phenomena	in	detail,	and	
saṅkhya	
refers	to	that	philosophy	which
describes	the	real	nature	of	the	soul.	And	
yoga	
involves	controlling	the	senses.
Arjuna's	proposal	not	to	fight	was	based	on	sense	gratification.	Forgetting	his
prime	duty,	he	wanted	to	cease	fighting	because	he	thought	that	by	not	killing
his	relatives	and	kinsmen	he	would	be	happier	than	by	enjoying	the	kingdom
by	conquering	his	cousins	and	brothers,	the	sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra.	In	both	ways,
the	basic	principles	were	for	sense	gratification.	Happiness	derived	from
conquering	them	and	happiness	derived	by	seeing	kinsmen	alive	are	both	on
the	basis	of	personal	sense	gratification,	for	there	is	a	sacrifice	of	wisdom	and
duty.	Kṛṣṇa,	therefore,	wanted	to	explain	to	Arjuna	that	by	killing	the	body	of
his	grandfather	he	would	not	be	killing	the	soul	proper,	and	He	explained	that
all	individual	persons,	including	the	Lord	Himself,	are	eternal	individuals;
they	were	individuals	in	the	past,	they	are	individuals	in	the	present,	and	they
will	continue	to	remain	individuals	in	the	future,	because	all	of	us	are
individual	souls	eternally,	and	we	simply	change	our	bodily	dress	in	different
manners.	But,	actually,	we	keep	our	individuality	even	after	liberation	from
the	bondage	of	material	dress.	An	analytical	study	of	the	soul	and	the	body	has
been	very	graphically	explained	by	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.	And	this	descriptive
knowledge	of	the	soul	and	the	body	from	different	angles	of	vision	has	been
described	here	as	
sāṅkhya,
	in	terms	of	the	
Nirukti	
dictionary.	This	
sāṅkhya	
has
nothing	to	do	with	the	
sāṅkhya	
philosophy	of	the	atheist	Kapila.	Long	before
the	imposter	Kapila's	
sāṅkhya,	
the	
sāṅkhya	
philosophy	was	expounded	in	the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
by	the	true	Lord	Kapila,	the	incarnation	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,who	explained	it	to	His	mother,	Devahūti.	It	is	clearly	explained	by	Him	that
the	
Puruṣa,	
or	the	Supreme	Lord,	is	active	and	that	He	creates	by	looking	over
the	
prakṛti.	
This	is	accepted	in	the	
Vedas	
and	in	the	
Gītā.	
The	description	in
the	
Vedas	
indicates	that	the	Lord	glanced	over	the	
prakṛti,	
or	nature,	and
impregnated	it	with	atomic	individuals	souls.	All	these	individuals	are
working	in	the	material	world	for	sense	gratification,	and	under	the	spell	of
material	energy	they	are	thinking	of	being	enjoyers.	This	mentality	is	dragged
to	the	last	point	of	liberation	when	the	living	entity	wants	to	become	one	with
the	Lord.	This	is	the	last	snare	of	
māyā	
or	sense	gratificatory	illusion,	and	it	is
only	after	many,	many	births	of	such	sense	gratificatory	activities	that	a	great
soul	surrenders	unto	Vāsudeva,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	thereby	fulfilling	the	search	after
the	ultimate	truth.
Arjuna	has	already	accepted	Kṛṣṇa	as	his	spiritual	master	by	surrendering
himself	unto	Him:	
śiṣyas	te	'haṁ	śādhi	māṁ	tvāṁ	prapannam.	
Consequently,
Kṛṣṇa	will	now	tell	him	about	the	working	process	in	
buddhi-yoga,	
or	
karma-
yoga,	
or	in	other	words,	the	practice	of	devotional	service	only	for	the	sense
gratification	of	the	Lord.	This	
buddhi-yoga
	is	clearly	explained	in	Chapter
Ten,	verse	ten,	as	being	direct	communion	with	the	Lord,	who	is	sitting	as
Paramātmā	in	everyone's	heart.	But	such	communion	does	not	take	place
without	devotional	service.	One	who	is	therefore	situated	in	devotional	or
transcendental	loving	service	to	the	Lord,	or,	in	other	words,	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	attains	to	this	stage	of	
buddhi-yoga	
by	the	special	grace	of	the
Lord.	The	Lord	says,	therefore,	that	only	to	those	who	are	always	engaged	in
devotional	service	out	of	transcendental	love	does	He	award	the	pure
knowledge	of	devotion	in	love.	In	that	way	the	devotee	can	reach	Him	easily
in	the	ever-blissful	kingdom	of	God.
Thus	the	
buddhi-yoga	
mentioned	in	this	verse	is	the	devotional	service	of
the	Lord,	and	the	word	
sāṅkhya	
mentioned	herein	has	nothing	to	do	with	the
atheistic	
sāṅkhya-yoga	
enunciated	by	the	impostor	Kapila.	One	should	not,
therefore,	misunderstand	that	the	
sāṅkhya-yoga	
mentioned	herein	has	any
connection	with	the	atheistic	
sāṅkhya.	
Nor	did	that	philosophy	have	any
influence	during	that	time;	nor	would	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	care	to	mention	such
godless	philosophical	speculations.	Real	
sāṅkhya	
philosophy	is	described	by
Lord	Kapila	in	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,	
but	even	that	
sāṅkhya	
has	nothing	to
do	with	the	current	topics.	Here,	
sāṅkhya	
means	analytical	description	of	the
body	and	the	soul.	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	made	an	analytical	description	of	the	soul	just
to	bring	Arjuna	to	the	point	of	
buddhi-yoga,	
or	
bhakti-yoga.	
Therefore,	Lord
Kṛṣṇa's	
sāṅkhya	
and	Lord	Kapila's	
sāṅkhya,	
as	described	in	the	
Bhāgavatam;are	one	and	the	same.	They	are	all	
bhakti-yoga.	
He	said,	therefore,	that	only
the	less	intelligent	class	of	men	make	a	distinction	between	
sāṅkhya-yoga	
and
bhakti-yoga.
Of	course,	atheistic	
sāṅkhya-yoga	
has	nothing	to	do	with	
bhakti-yoga,	
yet
the	unintelligent	claim	that	the	atheistic	
sāṅkhya-yoga	
is	referred	to	in	the
Bhagavad-gītā.
One	should	therefore	understand	that	
buddhi-yoga	
means	to	work	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	in	the	full	bliss	and	knowledge	of	devotional	service.	One	who
works	for	the	satisfaction	of	the	Lord	only,	however	difficult	such	work	may
be,	is	working	under	the	principles	of	
buddhi-yoga	
and	finds	himself	always	in
transcendental	bliss.	By	such	transcendental	engagement,	one	achieves	all
transcendental	qualities	automatically,	by	the	grace	of	the	Lord,	and	thus	his
liberation	is	complete	in	itself,	without	his	making	extraneous	endeavors	to
acquire	knowledge.	There	is	much	difference	between	work	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	and	work	for	fruitive	results,	especially	in	the	matter	of	sense
gratification	for	achieving	results	in	terms	of	family	or	material	happiness.
Buddhi-yoga
	is	therefore	the	transcendental	quality	of	the	work	that	we
perform.
TEXT	40
न े ह ा ि भ क ् र म न ा श ो ऽ ि ᇿ त
	
प ् र ᇰ य व ा य ो
	
न
	
ि व ሱ त े
	
।
ᇿ व ᇺ प म ᇴ य ᇿ य
	
ध म ᆼ ᇿ य
	
त ् र ा य त े
	
म ह त ो
	
भ य ा त ्
	
॥
४ ०
॥
nehābhikrama-nāśo	'sti
pratyavāyo	na	vidyate
svalpam	apy	asya	dharmasya
trāyate	mahato	bhayāt
na—
there	is	not;	
iha—
in	this	world;	
abhikrama—
endeavoring;	
nāśaḥ—
loss;	
asti—
there	is;	
pratyavāyaḥ—
diminution;	
na—
never;	
vidyate—
there	is;
svalpam—
little;	
api—
although;	
asya—
of	this;	
dharmasya—
of	this	occupation;
trāyate—
releases;	
mahataḥ—
of	very	great;	
bhayāt—
from	danger.
TRANSLATIONIn	this	endeavor	there	is	no	loss	or	diminution,	and	a	little	advancement
on	this	path	can	protect	one	from	the	most	dangerous	type	of	fear.
PURPORT
Activity	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	or	acting	for	the	benefit	of	Kṛṣṇa	without
expectation	of	sense	gratification,	is	the	highest	transcendental	quality	of
work.	Even	a	small	beginning	of	such	activity	finds	no	impediment,	nor	can
that	small	beginning	be	lost	at	any	stage.	Any	work	begun	on	the	material
plane	has	to	be	completed,	otherwise	the	whole	attempt	becomes	a	failure.	But
any	work	begun	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	has	a	permanent	effect,	even	though
not	finished.	The	performer	of	such	work	is	therefore	not	at	a	loss	even	if	his
work	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	incomplete.	One	percent	done	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	bears	permanent	results,	so	that	the	next	beginning	is	from	the
point	of	two	percent;	whereas,	in	material	activity,	without	a	hundred	percent
success,	there	is	no	profit.	Ajāmila	performed	his	duty	in	some	percentage	of
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	but	the	result	he	enjoyed	at	the	end	was	a	hundred
percent,	by	the	grace	of	the	Lord.	There	is	a	nice	verse	in	this	connection	in
Śrīmad-	Bhāgavatam:
tyaktvā	sva-dharmaṁ	caraṇāmbujaṁ	harer
bhajan	na	pakko	'tha	patet	tato	yadi
yatra	kva	vābhadram	abhūd	amuṣya	kiṁ
ko	vārtha	āpto	'bhajatāṁ	sva-dharmataḥ
"If	someone	gives	up	self-gratificatory	pursuits	and	works	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	and	then	falls	down	on	account	of	not	completing	his	work,
what	loss	is	there	on	his	part?	And,	what	can	one	gain	if	one	performs	his
material	activities	perfectly?"	
(Bhāg.	
1.5.17)	Or,	as	the	Christians	say,	"What
profiteth	a	man	if	he	gain	the	whole	world	yet	suffers	the	loss	of	his	eternal
soul?"
Material	activities	and	their	results	end	with	the	body.	But	work	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	carries	the	person	again	to	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	even	after	the
loss	of	the	body.	At	least	one	is	sure	to	have	a	chance	in	the	next	life	of	being
born	again	as	a	human	being,	either	in	the	family	of	a	great	cultured	
brāhmaṇa
or	in	a	rich	aristocratic	family	that	will	give	one	a	further	chance	for	elevation.
That	is	the	unique	quality	of	work	done	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.TEXT	41
ᇼ य व स ा य ा ि ᇰ म क ा
	
ब ु द ् ि ध र े क े ह
	
क ु ኄ न ᇳ द न
	
।
ब ह ु श ा ख ा
	
ቋ न ᇳ त ा ᇽ च
	
ब ु ሬ य ो ऽ ᇼ य व स ा ि य न ा म ्
	
॥
४ १
॥
vyavasāyātmikā	buddhir
ekeha	kuru-nandana
bahu-śākhā	hy	anantāś	ca
buddhayo	'vyavasāyinām
vyavasāyātmikā—
resolute	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness;	
buddhiḥ—
intelligence;	
ekā
—
only	one;	
iha—
in	this	world;	
kuru-nandana
—O	beloved	child	of	the	Kurus;
bahu-śākhāḥ—
various	branches;	
hi—
indeed;	
anantāḥ—
unlimited;	
ca—
also;
buddhayaḥ—
intelligence;	
avyavasāyinām—
of	those	who	are	not	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.
TRANSLATION
Those	who	are	on	this	path	are	resolute	in	purpose,	and	their	aim	is
one.	O	beloved	child	of	the	Kurus,	the	intelligence	of	those	who	are
irresolute	is	many-branched.
PURPORT
A	strong	faith	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	that	one	should	be	elevated	to	the
highest	perfection	of	life	is	called	
vyavasāyātmikā
	intelligence.	The	
Caitanya-
caritāmṛta	
states:
'śraddhā'-śabde	viśvāsa	kahe	sudṛḍha	niścaya
kṛṣṇe	bhakti	kaile	sarva-karma	kṛta	haya.
Faith	means	unflinching	trust	in	something	sublime.	When	one	is	engaged	in
the	duties	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	he	need	not	act	in	relationship	to	the
material	world	with	obligations	to	family	traditions,	humanity,	or	nationality.
Fruitive	activities	are	the	engagements	of	one's	reactions	from	past	good	or
bad	deeds.	When	one	is	awake	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	he	need	no	longerendeavor	for	good	results	in	his	activities.	When	one	is	situated	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	all	activities	are	on	the	absolute	plane,	for	they	are	no	longer
subject	to	dualities	like	good	and	bad.	The	highest	perfection	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	renunciation	of	the	material	conception	of	life.	This	state	is
automatically	achieved	by	progressive	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	The	resolute
purpose	of	a	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	based	on	knowledge
("Vāsudevaḥ	sarvam	iti	sa	mahātmā	sudurlabhaḥ")	
by	which	one	comes	to
know	perfectly	that	Vāsudeva,	or	Kṛṣṇa,	is	the	root	of	all	manifested	causes.
As	water	on	the	root	of	a	tree	is	automatically	distributed	to	the	leaves	and
branches,	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	one	can	render	the	highest	service	to
everyone–namely	self,	family,	society,	country,	humanity,	etc.	If	Kṛṣṇa	is
satisfied	by	one's	actions,	then	everyone	will	be	satisfied.
Service	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is,	however,	best	practiced	under	the	able
guidance	of	a	spiritual	master	who	is	a	bona	fide	representative	of	Kṛṣṇa,	who
knows	the	nature	of	the	student	and	who	can	guide	him	to	act	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	As	such,	to	be	well-versed	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	one	has	to
act	firmly	and	obey	the	representative	of	Kṛṣṇa,	and	one	should	accept	the
instruction	of	the	bona	fide	spiritual	master	as	one's	mission	in	life.	Śrīla
Viśvanātha	Cakravartī	Ṭhākur	instructs	us,	in	his	famous	prayers	for	the
spiritual	master,	as	follows:
yasya	prasādād	bhagavat-prasādo
yasyāprasādānna	gatiḥ	kuto	'pi
dhyāyaṁ	stuvaṁs	tasya	yaśas	tri-sandhyaṁ
vande	guroḥ	śrī-caraṇāravindam.
"By	satisfaction	of	the	spiritual	master,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead
becomes	satisfied.	And	by	not	satisfying	the	spiritual	master,	there	is	no
chance	of	being	promoted	to	the	plane	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	I	should,
therefore,	meditate	and	pray	for	his	mercy	three	times	a	day,	and	offer	my
respectful	obeisances	unto	him,	my	spiritual	master."
The	whole	process,	however,	depends	on	perfect	knowledge	of	the	soul
beyond	the	conception	of	the	body–not	theoretically	but	practically,	when
there	is	no	longer	chance	for	sense	gratification	manifested	in	fruitive
activities.	One	who	is	not	firmly	fixed	in	mind	is	diverted	by	various	types	of
fruitive	acts.
TEXTS	42-43य ा ि म म ा ं
	
प ु ि ᇾ प त ा ं
	
व ा च ं
	
प ् र व द ᇳ ᇰ य ि व प ि ᇽ च त ः
	
।
व े द व ा द र त ा ः
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
न ा ᇳ य द ᇿ त ी ि त
	
व ा ि द न ः
	
॥
४ २
॥
क ा म ा ᇰ म ा न ः
	
ᇿ व ग ᆼ प र ा
	
ज ᇳ म क म ᆼ फ ल प ् र द ा म ्
	
।
ि क ् र य ा ि व श े ष ब ह ु ल ा ं
	
भ ो ग ै ᇽ व य ᆼ ग ि त ं
	
प ् र ि त
	
॥
४ ३
॥
yām	imāṁ	puṣpitāṁ	vācaṁ
pravadanty	avipaścitaḥ
veda-vāda-ratāḥ	pārtha
nānyad	astīti	vādinaḥ
kāmātmānaḥ	svarga-parā
janma-karma-phala-pradām
kriyā-viśeṣa-bahulāṁ
bhogaiśvarya-gatiṁ	prati
yām	imām—
all	these;	
puṣpitām—
flowery;	
vācam—
words;	
pravadanti—
say;	
avipaścitaḥ—
men	with	a	poor	fund	of	knowledge;	
veda-vāda-ratāḥ—
supposed	followers	of	the	
Vedas;	pārtha
—O	son	of	Pṛtha;	
na—
never;	
anyat
—
anything	else;	
asti—
there	is;	
iti—
this;	
vādinaḥ—
advocates;	
kāma-	ātmānaḥ
—
desirous	of	sense	gratification;	
svarga-parāḥ—
aiming	to	achieve	heavenly
planets;	
janma-karma-phala-pradām—
resulting	in	fruitive	action,	good	birth,
etc.;	
kriyā-viśeṣa—
pompous	ceremonies;	
bahulām—
various;	
bhoga—
sense
enjoyment;	
aiśvarya—
opulence;	
gatim—
progress;	
prati—	
towards.
TRANSLATION
Men	of	small	knowledge	are	very	much	attached	to	the	flowery	words
of	the	Vedas,	which	recommend	various	fruitive	activities	for	elevation	to
heavenly	planets,	resultant	good	birth,	power,	and	so	forth.	Being
desirous	of	sense	gratification	and	opulent	life,	they	say	that	there	is
nothing	more	than	this.
PURPORT
People	in	general	are	not	very	intelligent,	and	due	to	their	ignorance	they
are	most	attached	to	the	fruitive	activities	recommended	in	the	
karma-kāṇḍa
portions	of	the	
Vedas.	
They	do	not	want	anything	more	than	sensegratificatory	proposals	for	enjoying	life	in	heaven,	where	wine	and	women	are
available	and	material	opulence	is	very	common.	In	the	
Vedas	
many	sacrifices
are	recommended	for	elevation	to	the	heavenly	planets,	especially	the
jyotiṣṭoma	
sacrifices.	In	fact,	it	is	stated	that	anyone	desiring	elevation	to
heavenly	planets	must	perform	these	sacrifices,	and	men	with	a	poor	fund	of
knowledge	think	that	this	is	the	whole	purpose	of	Vedic	wisdom.	It	is	very
difficult	for	such	inexperienced	persons	to	be	situated	in	the	determined	action
of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	As	fools	are	attached	to	the	flowers	of	poisonous
trees	without	knowing	the	results	of	such	attractions,	similarly	unenlightened
men	are	attracted	by	such	heavenly	opulence	and	the	sense	enjoyment	thereof.
In	the	
karma-kāṇḍa	
section	of	the	
Vedas	
it	is	said	that	those	who	perform
the	four	monthly	penances	become	eligible	to	drink	the	
somarasa	
beverages	to
become	immortal	and	happy	forever.	Even	on	this	earth	some	are	very	eager
to	have	
somarasa	
to	become	strong	and	fit	to	enjoy	sense	gratifications.	Such
persons	have	no	faith	in	liberation	from	material	bondage,	and	they	are	very
much	attached	to	the	pompous	ceremonies	of	Vedic	sacrifices.	They	are
generally	sensual,	and	they	do	not	want	anything	other	than	the	heavenly
pleasures	of	life.	It	is	understood	that	there	are	gardens	called	
nandana-
kānana	
in	which	there	is	good	opportunity	for	association	with	angelic,
beautiful	women	and	having	a	profuse	supply	of	
somarasa	
wine.	Such	bodily
happiness	is	certainly	sensual;	therefore	there	are	those	who	are	purely
attached	to	material,	temporary	happiness,	as	lords	of	the	material	world.
TEXT	44
भ ो ग ै ᇽ व य ᆼ प ् र स ᇧ त ा न ा ं
	
त य ा प ᇦ त च े त स ा म ्
	
।
ᇼ य व स ा य ा ि ᇰ म क ा
	
ब ु द ् ि ध ः
	
स म ा ध ौ
	
न
	
ि व ध ी य त े
	
॥
४ ४
॥
bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānāṁ
tayāpahṛta-cetasām
vyavasāyātmikā	buddhiḥ
samādhau	na	vidhīyate
bhoga—
material	enjoyment;	
aiśvarya—
opulence;	
prasaktānām—
those	who
are	so	attached;	
tayā—
by	such	things;	
apahṛta-cetasām—
bewildered	in	mind;
vyavasāyātmikā—
fixed	determination;	
buddhiḥ—
devotional	service	of	the
Lord;	
samādhau—
in	the	controlled	mind;	
na—
never;	
vidhīyate—
does	takeplace.
TRANSLATION
In	the	minds	of	those	who	are	too	attached	to	sense	enjoyment	and
material	opulence,	and	who	are	bewildered	by	such	things,	the	resolute
determination	of	devotional	service	to	the	Supreme	Lord	does	not	take
place.
PURPORT
Samādhi	
means	"fixed	mind."	The	Vedic	dictionary,	the	
Nirukti,
	says,
samyag	ādhīyate	'sminn	ātmatattva-yāthātmyam:	
"When	the	mind	is	fixed	for
understanding	the	self,	it	is	called	
samādhi."	Samādhi
	is	never	possible	for
persons	interested	in	material	sense	enjoyment,	nor	for	those	who	are
bewildered	by	such	temporary	things.	They	are	more	or	less	condemned	by
the	process	of	material	energy.
TEXT	45
त ् र ै ग ु ᇯ य ि व ष य ा
	
व े द ा
	
ि न ᇿ त ् र ै ग ु ᇯ य ो
	
भ व ा ज ु ᆼ न
	
।
ि न द ् ᆼ व ᇳ ሲ ो
	
ि न ᇰ य स ᇰ ᇰ व ᇿ थ ो
	
ि न य ो ᆼ ग ᇤ े म
	
आ ᇰ म व ा न ्
	
॥
४ ५
॥
traiguṇya-viṣayā	vedā
nistraiguṇyo	bhavārjuna
nirdvandvo	nitya-sattva-stho
niryoga-kṣema	ātmavān
traiguṇya—
pertaining	to	the	three	modes	of	material	nature;	
viṣayāḥ—	
on
the	subject	matter;	
vedāḥ—
Vedic	literatures;	
nistraiguṇyaḥ—
in	a	pure	state	of
spiritual	existence;	
bhava—
be;	arjuna-O	Arjuna;	
nirdvandvaḥ—
free	from	the
pains	of	opposites;	
nitya-sattva-sthaḥ—
ever	remaining	in	
sattva	
(goodness);
niryoga-kṣemaḥ—
free	from	(the	thought	of)	acquisition	and	preservation;
ātmavān—
established	in	the	Self.TRANSLATION
The	Vedas	mainly	deal	with	the	subject	of	the	three	modes	of	material
nature.	Rise	above	these	modes,	O	Arjuna.	Be	transcendental	to	all	of
them.	Be	free	from	all	dualities	and	from	all	anxieties	for	gain	and	safety,
and	be	established	in	the	Self.
PURPORT
All	material	activities	involve	actions	and	reactions	in	the	three	modes	of
material	nature.	They	are	meant	for	fruitive	results,	which	cause	bondage	in
the	material	world.	The	
Vedas	
deal	mostly	with	fruitive	activities	to	gradually
elevate	the	general	public	from	the	field	of	sense	gratification	to	a	position	on
the	transcendental	plane.	Arjuna,	as	a	student	and	friend	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	is
advised	to	raise	himself	to	the	transcendental	position	of	
Vedānta	
philosophy
where,	in	the	beginning,	there	is	
brahma-jijñāsā,	
or	questions	on	the	Supreme
Transcendence.	All	the	living	entities	who	are	in	the	material	world	are
struggling	very	hard	for	existence.	For	them	the	Lord,	after	creation	of	the
material	world,	gave	the	Vedic	wisdom	advising	how	to	live	and	get	rid	of	the
material	entanglement.	When	the	activities	for	sense	gratification,	namely	the
karma-kāṇḍa	
chapter,	are	finished,	then	the	chance	for	spiritual	realization	is
offered	in	the	form	of	the	
Upaniṣads,	
which	are	part	of	different	
Vedas,	
as	the
Bhagavad-gītā
	is	a	part	of	the	fifth	
Veda,	
namely	the	
Mahābhārata.	
The
Upaniṣads	
mark	the	beginning	of	transcendental	life.
As	long	as	the	material	body	exists,	there	are	actions	and	reactions	in	the
material	modes.	One	has	to	learn	tolerance	in	the	face	of	dualities	such	as
happiness	and	distress,	or	cold	and	warmth,	and	by	tolerating	such	dualities
become	free	from	anxieties	regarding	gain	and	loss.	This	transcendental
position	is	achieved	in	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	when	one	is	fully	dependant
on	the	good	will	of	Kṛṣṇa
TEXT	46
य ा व ा न थ ᆼ
	
उ द प ा न े
	
स व ᆼ त ः
	
स ᇸ ᇴ ल ु त ो द क े
	
।
त ा व ा ᇳ स व ᆹ ष ु
	
व े द े ष ु
	
ब ् र ा ቊ ण ᇿ य
	
ि व ज ा न त ः
	
॥
४ ६
॥yāvān	artha	udapāne
sarvataḥ	samplutodake
tāvān	sarveṣu	vedeṣu
brāhmaṇasya	vijānataḥ
yāvān—
all	that;	
arthaḥ—
is	meant;	
udapāne—
in	a	well	of	water;	
sarvataḥ
—
in	all	respects;	
sampluta-udake—
in	a	great	reservoir	of	water;	
tāvān
—
similarly;
	sarveṣu—
in	all;	
vedeṣu—
Vedic	literatures;	
brāhmaṇasya—
of	the
man	who	knows	the	Supreme	Brahman;	
vijānataḥ—
of	one	who	is	in	complete
knowledge.
TRANSLATION
All	purposes	that	are	served	by	the	small	pond	can	at	once	be	served	by
the	great	reservoirs	of	water.	Similarly,	all	the	purposes	of	the	Vedas	can
be	served	to	one	who	knows	the	purpose	behind	them.
PURPORT
The	rituals	and	sacrifices	mentioned	in	the	
karma-kāṇḍa	
division	of	the
Vedic	literature	are	to	encourage	gradual	development	of	self-realization.	And
the	purpose	of	self-realization	is	clearly	stated	in	the	Fifteenth	Chapter	of	the
Bhagavad-gītā	
(15.15):	the	purpose	of	studying	the	
Vedas
	is	to	know	Lord
Kṛṣṇa,	the	primeval	cause	of	everything.	So,	self-realization	means
understanding	Kṛṣṇa	and	one's	eternal	relationship	with	Him.	The	relationship
of	the	living	entities	with	Kṛṣṇa	is	also	mentioned	in	the	Fifteenth	Chapter	of
Bhagavad-gītā.	
The	living	entities	are	parts	and	parcels	of	Kṛṣṇa;	therefore,
revival	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	by	the	individual	living	entity	is	the	highest
perfectional	stage	of	Vedic	knowledge.	This	is	confirmed	in	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam	
(3.33.7)	as	follows:
aho	bata	śvapaco'to	garīyān
yaj-jihvāgre	vartate	nāma	tubhyam
tepus	tapas	te	juhuvuḥ	sasnur	āryā
brahmānūcur	nāma	gṛṇanti	ye	te.
"O	my	Lord,	a	person	who	is	chanting	Your	holy	name,	although	born	of	alow	family	like	that	of	a	
cāṇḍāla	
[dog	eater],	is	situated	on	the	highest
platform	of	self-realization.	Such	a	person	must	have	performed	all	kinds	of
penances	and	sacrifices	according	to	Vedic	rituals	and	studied	the	Vedic
literatures	many,	many	times	after	taking	his	bath	in	all	the	holy	places	of
pilgrimage.	Such	a	person	is	considered	to	be	the	best	of	the	Āryan	family."
So	one	must	be	intelligent	enough	to	understand	the	purpose	of	the	
Vedas,
without	being	attached	to	the	rituals	only,	and	must	not	desire	to	be	elevated	to
the	heavenly	kingdoms	for	a	better	quality	of	sense	gratification.	It	is	not
possible	for	the	common	man	in	this	age	to	follow	all	the	rules	and	regulations
of	the	Vedic	rituals	and	the	injunctions	of	the	
Vedāntas	
and	the	
Upaniṣads.	
It
requires	much	time,	energy,	knowledge	and	resources	to	execute	the	purposes
of	the	
Vedas.	
This	is	hardly	possible	in	this	age.	The	best	purpose	of	Vedic
culture	is	served,	however,	by	chanting	the	holy	name	of	the	Lord,	as
recommended	by	Lord	Caitanya,	the	deliverer	of	all	fallen	souls.	When	Lord
Caitanya	was	asked	by	a	great	Vedic	scholar,	Prakāśānanda	Sarasvatī,	why	He,
the	Lord,	was	chanting	the	holy	name	of	the	Lord	like	a	sentimentalist	instead
of	studying	
Vedānta	
philosophy,	the	Lord	replied	that	His	spiritual	master
found	Him	to	be	a	great	fool,	and	thus	he	asked	Him	to	chant	the	holy	name	of
Lord	Kṛṣṇa.	He	did	so,	and	became	ecstatic	like	a	madman.	In	this	age	of	Kali,
most	of	the	population	is	foolish	and	not	adequately	educated	to	understand
Vedānta	
philosophy;	the	best	purpose	of	
Vedānta	
philosophy	is	served	by
inoffensively	chanting	the	holy	name	of	the	Lord.	
Vedānta	
is	the	last	word	in
Vedic	wisdom,	and	the	author	and	knower	of	the	
Vedānta	
philosophy	is	Lord
Kṛṣṇa;	and	the	highest	Vedantist	is	the	great	soul	who	takes	pleasure	in
chanting	the	holy	name	of	the	Lord.	That	is	the	ultimate	purpose	of	all	Vedic
mysticism.
TEXT	47
क म ᆼ ᇯ य े व ा ि ध क ा र ᇿ त े
	
म ा
	
फ ल े ष ु
	
क द ा च न
	
।
	
म ा
	
क म ᆼ फ ल ह े त ु भ ू ᆼ म ा ᆼ
	
त े
	
स ङ ् ग ो ऽ ᇿ ᇰ व क म ᆼ ि ण
	
॥
४ ७
॥
karmaṇy	evādhikāras	te
mā	phaleṣu	kadācana
mā	karma-phala-hetur	bhūr
mā	te	saṅgo	'stv	akarmaṇikarmaṇi—
prescribed	duties;	
eva—
certainly;	
adhikāraḥ—
right;	te
—
of	you;
mā—
never;	
phaleṣu—
in	the	fruits;	
kadācana—
at	any	time;	
mā—
never;	
karma-
phala—
in	the	result	of	the	work;	
hetuḥ—
cause;	
bhūḥ—
become;	
mā—	
never;	
te
—
of	you;	
saṅgaḥ—
attachment;	
astu—
be	there;	
akarmaṇi—
in	not	doing.
TRANSLATION
You	have	a	right	to	perform	your	prescribed	duty,	but	you	are	not
entitled	to	the	fruits	of	action.	Never	consider	yourself	to	be	the	cause	of
the	results	of	your	activities,	and	never	be	attached	to	not	doing	your
duty.
PURPORT
There	are	three	considerations	here:	prescribed	duties,	capricious	work,	and
inaction.	Prescribed	duties	refer	to	activities	performed	while	one	is	in	the
modes	of	material	nature.	Capricious	work	means	actions	without	the	sanction
of	authority,	and	inaction	means	not	performing	one's	prescribed	duties.	The
Lord	advised	that	Arjuna	not	be	inactive,	but	that	he	perform	his	prescribed
duty	without	being	attached	to	the	result.	One	who	is	attached	to	the	result	of
his	work	is	also	the	cause	of	the	action.	Thus	he	is	the	enjoyer	or	sufferer	of
the	result	of	such	actions.
As	far	as	prescribed	duties	are	concerned,	they	can	be	fitted	into	three
subdivisions,	namely	routine	work,	emergency	work	and	desired	activities.
Routine	work,	in	terms	of	the	scriptural	injunctions,	is	done	without	desire	for
results.	As	one	has	to	do	it,	obligatory	work	is	action	in	the	mode	of	goodness.
Work	with	results	becomes	the	cause	of	bondage;	therefore	such	work	is	not
auspicious.	Everyone	has	his	proprietory	right	in	regard	to	prescribed	duties,
but	should	act	without	attachment	to	the	result;	such	disinterested	obligatory
duties	doubtlessly	lead	one	to	the	path	of	liberation.
Arjuna	was	therefore	advised	by	the	Lord	to	fight	as	a	matter	of	duty
without	attachment	to	the	result.	His	nonparticipation	in	the	battle	is	another
side	of	attachment.	Such	attachment	never	leads	one	to	the	path	of	salvation.
Any	attachment,	positive	or	negative,	is	cause	for	bondage.	Inaction	is	sinful.
Therefore,	fighting	as	a	matter	of	duty	was	the	only	auspicious	path	of
salvation	for	Arjuna.TEXT	48
य ो ग ᇿ थ ः
	
क ु ኄ
	
क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
स ङ ् ग ं
	
ᇰ य ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
ध न ᇮ ज य
	
।
ि स ሬ ᆸ ि स ሬ ᆸ ो ः
	
स म ो
	
भ ू ᇰ व ा
	
स म ᇰ व ं
	
य ो ग
	
उ ᇫ य त े
	
॥
४ ८
॥
yoga-sthaḥ	kuru	karmāṇi
saṅgaṁ	tyaktvā	dhanañjaya
siddhy-asiddhyoḥ	samo	bhūtvā
samatvaṁ	yoga	ucyate
yoga-sthaḥ—
steadfast	in	
yoga;	kuru—
perform;	
karmāṇi—
your	duty;
saṅgam—
attachment;	
tyaktvā—
having	abandoned;	
dhanañjaya—
O
Dhanañjaya;	
siddhi-asiddhyoḥ—
in	success	and	failure;	
samaḥ—
the	same;
bhūtvā—
having	become;	
samatvam—
evenness	of	mind;	
yogaḥ-yoga;	ucyate
—
is	called.
TRANSLATION
Be	steadfast	in	yoga,	O	Arjuna.	Perform	your	duty	and	abandon	all
attachment	to	success	or	failure.	Such	evenness	of	mind	is	called	yoga.
PURPORT
Kṛṣṇa	tells	Arjuna	that	he	should	act	in	
yoga.	
And	what	is	that	
yoga?	Yoga
means	to	concentrate	the	mind	upon	the	Supreme	by	controlling	the	ever-
disturbing	senses.	And	who	is	the	Supreme?	The	Supreme	is	the	Lord.	And
because	He	Himself	is	telling	Arjuna	to	fight,	Arjuna	has	nothing	to	do	with
the	results	of	the	fight.	Gain	or	victory	are	Kṛṣṇa's	concern;	Arjuna	is	simply
advised	to	act	according	to	the	dictation	of	Kṛṣṇa.	The	following	of	Kṛṣṇa's
dictation	is	real	
yoga,	
and	this	is	practiced	in	the	process	called	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	By	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	only	can	one	give	up	the	sense	of
proprietorship.	One	has	to	become	the	servant	of	Kṛṣṇa,	or	the	servant	of	the
servant	of	Kṛṣṇa.	That	is	the	right	way	to	discharge	duty	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	which	alone	can	help	one	to	act	in	
yoga.
Arjuna	is	a	
kṣatriya,	
and	as	such	he	is	participating	in	the	
varṇāśrama-
dharma	
institution.	It	is	said	in	the	
Viṣṇu
	
Puraṇa	
that	in	the	
varṇāśrama-dharma,	
the	whole	aim	is	to	satisfy	Viṣṇu.	No	one	should	satisfy	himself,	as	is
the	rule	in	the	material	world,	but	one	should	satisfy	Kṛṣṇa.	So,	unless	one
satisfies	Kṛṣṇa,	one	cannot	correctly	observe	the	principles	of	
varṇāśrama-
dharma.	
Indirectly,	Arjuna	was	advised	to	act	as	Kṛṣṇa	told	him.
TEXT	49
द ू र े ण
	
ቋ व र ं
	
क म ᆼ
	
ब ु द ् ि ध य ो ग ा ሬ न ᇮ ज य
	
।
ब ु ሬ ौ
	
श र ण म ि ᇳ व ᇫ छ
	
क ृ प ण ा ः
	
फ ल ह े त व ः
	
॥
४ ९
॥
dūreṇa	hy	avaraṁ	karma
buddhi-yogād	dhanañjaya
buddhau	śaraṇam	anviccha
kṛpaṇāḥ	phala-hetavaḥ
dūreṇa—
by	discarding	it	at	a	long	distance;	
hi—
certainly;	
avaram—
abominable;	
karma—
activities;	
buddhi-yogāt—
on	the	strength	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness;	
dhanañjaya
—O	conqueror	of	wealth;	
buddhau—
in	such
consciousness;	
śaraṇam—
full	surrender;	
anviccha—
desire;	
kṛpaṇāḥ—
the
misers;	
phala-hetavaḥ—
those	desiring	fruitive	action.
TRANSLATION
O	Dhanañjaya,	rid	yourself	of	all	fruitive	activities	by	devotional
service,	and	surrender	fully	to	that	consciousness.	Those	who	want	to
enjoy	the	fruits	of	their	work	are	misers.
PURPORT
One	who	has	actually	come	to	understand	one's	constitutional	position	as
the	eternal	servitor	of	the	Lord	gives	up	all	engagements	save	working	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	As	already	explained,	
buddhi-yoga	
means
transcendental	loving	service	to	the	Lord.	Such	devotional	service	is	the	right
course	of	action	for	the	living	entity.	Only	misers	desire	to	enjoy	the	fruit	of
their	own	work	just	to	be	further	entangled	in	material	bondage.	Except	for
work	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	all	activities	are	abominable	because	theycontinually	bind	the	worker	to	the	cycle	of	birth	and	death.	One	should
therefore	never	desire	to	be	the	cause	of	work.	Everything	should	be	done	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	for	the	satisfaction	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Misers	do	not	know	how	to
utilize	the	assets	of	riches	which	they	acquire	by	good	fortune	or	by	hard
labor.	One	should	spend	all	energies	working	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	and	that
will	make	one's	life	successful.	Like	the	misers,	unfortunate	persons	do	not
employ	their	human	energy	in	the	service	of	the	Lord.
TEXT	50
ब ु द ् ि ध य ु ᇧ त ो
	
ज ह ा त ी ह
	
उ भ े
	
स ु क ृ त द ु ᇾ क ृ त े
	
।
त ᇿ म ा ሱ ो ग ा य
	
य ु ᇬ य ᇿ व
	
य ो ग ः
	
क म ᆼ स ु
	
क ौ श ल म ्
	
॥
५ ०
॥
buddhi-yukto	jahātīha
ubhe	sukṛta-duṣkṛte
tasmād	yogāya	yujyasva
yogaḥ	karmasu	kauśalam
buddhi-yuktaḥ—
one	who	is	engaged	in	devotional	service;	
jahāti—
can	get
rid	of;	
iha—
in	this	life;	
ubhe—
in	both;	
sukṛta-duṣkṛte—
in	good	and	bad
results;	
tasmāt—
therefore;	
yogāya—
for	the	sake	of	devotional	service;
yujyasva—
be	so	engaged;	
yogaḥ—
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness;	
karmasu—
in	all
activities;	
kauśalam—
art.
TRANSLATION
A	man	engaged	in	devotional	service	rids	himself	of	both	good	and	bad
actions	even	in	this	life.	Therefore	strive	for	yoga,	O	Arjuna,	which	is	the
art	of	all	work.
PURPORT
Since	time	immemorial	each	living	entity	has	accumulated	the	various
reactions	of	his	good	and	bad	work.	As	such,	he	is	continuously	ignorant	of
his	real	constitutional	position.	One's	ignorance	can	be	removed	by	the
instruction	of	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
which	teaches	one	to	surrender	unto	Lord	ŚrīKṛṣṇa	in	all	respects	and	become	liberated	from	the	chained	victimization	of
action	and	reaction,	birth	after	birth.	Arjuna	is	therefore	advised	to	act	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	the	purifying	process	of	resultant	action.
TEXT	51
क म ᆼ ज ं
	
ब ु द ् ि ध य ु ᇧ त ा
	
ि ह
	
फ ल ं
	
ᇰ य ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
म न ी ि ष ण ः
	
।
ज ᇳ म ब ᇳ ध ि व ि न म ु ᆼ ᇧ त ा ः
	
प द ं
	
ग ᇫ छ ᇳ ᇰ य न ा म य म ्
	
॥
५ १
॥
karma-jaṁ	buddhi-yuktā	hi
phalaṁ	tyaktvā	manīṣiṇaḥ
janma-bandha-vinirmuktāḥ
padaṁ	gacchanty	anāmayam
karma-jam—
because	of	fruitive	activities;	
buddhi-yuktāḥ—
being	done	in
devotional	service;	
hi—
certainly;	
phalam—
results;	
tyaktvā—
giving	up;
manīṣiṇaḥ—
devotees	who	are	great	sages;	
janma-bandha—
the	bondage	of
birth	and	death;	
vinirmuktāḥ
—liberated	souls;
	padam—
position;	
gacchanti
—
reach;	
anāmayam—
without	miseries.
TRANSLATION
The	wise,	engaged	in	devotional	service,	take	refuge	in	the	Lord,	and
free	themselves	from	the	cycle	of	birth	and	death	by	renouncing	the	fruits
of	action	in	the	material	world.	In	this	way	they	can	attain	that	state
beyond	all	miseries.
PURPORT
The	liberated	living	entities	seek	that	place	where	there	are	no	material
miseries.	The	
Bhāgavatam	
says:
samāśritā	ye	padapallava-plavaṁ
mahat-padaṁ	puṇya-yaśo	murāreḥ
bhāvambudhir	vatsa-padaṁ	paraṁ	padaṁ
paraṁ	padaṁ	yad	vipadāṁ	na	teṣām(Bhāg.	10.14.58)
"For	one	who	has	accepted	the	boat	of	the	lotus	feet	of	the	Lord,	who	is	the
shelter	of	the	cosmic	manifestation	and	is	famous	as	Mukunda	or	the	giver	of
mukti,	
the	ocean	of	the	material	world	is	like	the	water	contained	in	a	calf's
hoofprint.	
Param	padam,	
or	the	place	where	there	are	no	material	miseries,	or
Vaikuṇṭha,	is	his	goal,	not	the	place	where	there	is	danger	in	every	step	of
life."
Owing	to	ignorance,	one	does	not	know	that	this	material	world	is	a
miserable	place	where	there	are	dangers	at	every	step.	Out	of	ignorance	only,
less	intelligent	persons	try	to	adjust	to	the	situation	by	fruitive	activities,
thinking	that	resultant	actions	will	make	them	happy.	They	do	not	know	that
no	kind	of	material	body	anywhere	within	the	universe	can	give	life	without
miseries.	The	miseries	of	life,	namely	birth,	death,	old	age	and	diseases,	are
present	everywhere	within	the	material	world.	But	one	who	understands	his
real	constitutional	position	as	the	eternal	servitor	of	the	Lord,	and	thus	knows
the	position	of	the	Personality	of	Godhead,	engages	himself	in	the
transcendental	loving	service	of	the	Lord.	Consequently	he	becomes	qualified
to	enter	into	the	Vaikuṇṭha	planets,	where	there	is	neither	material,	miserable
life,	nor	the	influence	of	time	and	death.	To	know	one's	constitutional	position
means	to	know	also	the	sublime	position	of	the	Lord.	One	who	wrongly	thinks
that	the	living	entity's	position	and	the	Lord's	position	are	on	the	same	level	is
to	be	understood	to	be	in	darkness	and	therefore	unable	to	engage	himself	in
the	devotional	service	of	the	Lord.	He	becomes	a	lord	himself	and	thus	paves
the	way	for	the	repetition	of	birth	and	death.	But	one	who,	understanding	that
his	position	is	to	serve,	transfers	himself	to	the	service	of	the	Lord,	at	once
becomes	eligible	for	Vaikuṇṭhaloka.	Service	for	the	cause	of	the	Lord	is	called
karma-yoga	
or	
buddhi-yoga,	
or	in	plain	words,	devotional	service	to	the	Lord.
TEXT	52
य द ा
	
त े
	
म ो ह क ि ल ल ं
	
ब ु द ् ि ध ᇼ य ᆼ ि त त ि र ᇾ य ि त
	
।
त द ा
	
ग ᇳ त ा ि स
	
ि न व ᆹ द ं
	
श ् र ो त ᇼ य ᇿ य
	
श ् ኄ त ᇿ य
	
च
	
॥
५ २
॥
yadā	te	moha-kalilaṁ
buddhir	vyatitariṣyati
tadā	gantāsi	nirvedaṁ
śrotavyasya	śrutasya	cayadā—
when;	
te—
your;	
moha—
illusory;	
kalilam—
dense	forest;	
buddhiḥ—
transcendental	service	with	intelligence;	
vyatitariṣyati—
surpasses;	
tadā—
at
that	time;	
gantāsi—
you	shall	go;	
nirvedam—
callousness;	
śrotavyasya—
all	that
is	to	be	heard;	
śrutasya—
all	that	is	already	heard;	
ca—
also.
TRANSLATION
When	your	intelligence	has	passed	out	of	the	dense	forest	of	delusion,
you	shall	become	indifferent	to	all	that	has	been	heard	and	all	that	is	to	be
heard.
PURPORT
There	are	many	good	examples	in	the	lives	of	the	great	devotees	of	the	Lord
of	those	who	became	indifferent	to	the	rituals	of	the	
Vedas	
simply	by
devotional	service	to	the	Lord.	When	a	person	factually	understands	Kṛṣṇa
and	his	relationship	with	Kṛṣṇa,	he	naturally	becomes	completely	indifferent
to	the	rituals	of	fruitive	activities,	even	though	an	experienced	
brāhmaṇa.	
Śrī
Mādhavendra	Purī,	a	great	devotee	and	
ācārya	
in	the	line	of	the	devotees,
says:
sandhyā-vandana	bhadram	astu	bhavato	bhoḥ	snāna	tubhyaṁ	namo
bho	devāḥ	pitaraś	ca	tarpaṇa-vidhau	nāhaṁ	kṣamaḥ	kṣamyatām
yatra	kvāpi	niṣadya	yādava-kulottamasya	kaṁsa-dviṣaḥ
smāraṁ	smāram	aghaṁ	harāmi	tad	alaṁ	manye	kim	anyena	me.
"O	Lord,	in	my	prayers	three	times	a	day,	all	glory	to	You.	Bathing,	I	offer	my
obeisances	unto	You.	O	demigods!	O	forefathers!	Please	excuse	me	for	my
inability	to	offer	you	my	respects.	Now	wherever	I	sit,	I	can	remember	the
great	descendant	of	the	Yadu	dynasty	[Kṛṣṇa],	the	enemy	of	Kaṁsa,	and
thereby	I	can	free	myself	from	all	sinful	bondage.	I	think	this	is	sufficient	for
me."
The	Vedic	rites	and	rituals	are	imperative	for	neophytes:	comprehending	all
kinds	of	prayer	three	times	a	day,	taking	a	bath	early	in	the	morning,	offering
respects	to	the	forefathers,	etc.	But,	when	one	is	fully	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness
and	is	engaged	in	His	transcendental	loving	service,	one	becomes	indifferent
to	all	these	regulative	principles	because	he	has	already	attained	perfection.	Ifone	can	reach	the	platform	of	understanding	by	service	to	the	Supreme	Lord
Kṛṣṇa,	he	has	no	longer	to	execute	different	types	of	penances	and	sacrifices
as	recommended	in	revealed	scriptures.	And,	similarly,	if	one	has	not
understood	that	the	purpose	of	the	
Vedas	
is	to	reach	Kṛṣṇa	and	simply	engages
in	the	rituals,	etc.,	then	he	is	uselessly	wasting	time	in	such	engagements.
Persons	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	transcend	the	limit	of	
śabda-brahma,	
or	the
range	of	the	
Vedas	
and	
Upaniṣads.
TEXT	53
श ् ኄ ि त ि व प ् र ि त प ᇳ न ा
	
त े
	
य द ा
	
ᇿ थ ा ᇿ य ि त
	
ि न ᇽ च ल ा
	
।
स म ा ध ा व च ल ा
	
ब ु द ् ि ध ᇿ त द ा
	
य ो ग म व ा ᇴ ᇿ य ि स
	
॥
५ ३
॥
śruti-vipratipannā	te
yadā	sthāsyati	niścalā
samādhāv	acalā	buddhis
tadā	yogam	avāpsyasi
śruti—
Vedic	revelation;	
vipratipannā—
without	being	influenced	by	the
fruitive	results	of	the	
Vedas;	te—
your;	
yadā—
when;	
sthāsyati—
remains;
niścalā—
unmoved;	
samādhau—
in	transcendental	consciousness,	or	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness;	
acalā—
unflinching;	
buddhiḥ—
intelligence;	
tadā—
at	that	time;
yogam—
self-realization;	
avāpsyasi—
you	will	achieve.
TRANSLATION
When	your	mind	is	no	longer	disturbed	by	the	flowery	language	of	the
Vedas,	and	when	it	remains	fixed	in	the	trance	of	self-realization,	then	you
will	have	attained	the	Divine	consciousness.
PURPORT
To	say	that	one	is	in	
samādhi	
is	to	say	that	one	has	fully	realized	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness;	that	is,	one	in	full	
samādhi	
has	realized	Brahman,	Paramātmā
and	Bhagavān.	The	highest	perfection	of	self-realization	is	to	understand	that
one	is	eternally	the	servitor	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	that	one's	only	business	is	todischarge	one's	duties	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person,	or
unflinching	devotee	of	the	Lord,	should	not	be	disturbed	by	the	flowery
language	of	the	
Vedas	
nor	be	engaged	in	fruitive	activities	for	promotion	to	the
heavenly	kingdom.	In	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	one	comes	directly	into
communion	with	Kṛṣṇa,	and	thus	all	directions	from	Kṛṣṇa	may	be	understood
in	that	transcendental	state.	One	is	sure	to	achieve	results	by	such	activities
and	attain	conclusive	knowledge.	One	has	only	to	carry	out	the	orders	of
Kṛṣṇa	or	His	representative,	the	spiritual	master.
TEXT	54
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
ि ᇿ थ त प ् र ᇥ ᇿ य
	
क ा
	
भ ा ष ा
	
स म ा ि ध ᇿ थ ᇿ य
	
क े श व
	
।
ि ᇿ थ त ध ी ः
	
ि क ं
	
प ् र भ ा ष े त
	
ि क म ा स ी त
	
व ् र ज े त
	
ि क म ्
	
॥
५ ४
॥
arjuna	uvāca
sthita-prajñasya	kā	bhāṣā
samādhi-sthasya	keśava
sthita-dhīḥ	kiṁ	prabhāṣeta
kim	āsīta	vrajeta	kiṁ
arjunaḥ	uvāca—
Arjuna	said;	
sthita-prajñasya—
of	one	who	is	situated	in
fixed	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness;	
kā—
what;	
bhāṣā—
language;	
samādhi-sthasya—
of
one	situated	in	trance;	
keśava
—O	Kṛṣṇa;	
sthita-dhīḥ—
one	fixed	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness;	
kim—
what;	
prabhāṣeta—
speak;	
kim—
how;	
āsīta—
does
remain;	
vrajeta—
walk;	
kim—
how.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	said:	What	are	the	symptoms	of	one	whose	consciousness	is
thus	merged	in	Transcendence?	How	does	he	speak,	and	what	is	his
language?	How	does	he	sit,	and	how	does	he	walk?
PURPORT
As	there	are	symptoms	for	each	and	every	man,	in	terms	of	his	particularsituation,	similarly	one	who	is	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	has	his	particular	nature–
talking,	walking,	thinking,	feeling,	etc.	As	a	rich	man	has	his	symptoms	by
which	he	is	known	as	a	rich	man,	as	a	diseased	man	has	his	symptoms,	by
which	he	is	known	as	diseased,	or	as	a	learned	man	has	his	symptoms,	so	a
man	in	transcendental	consciousness	of	Kṛṣṇa	has	specific	symptoms	in
various	dealings.	One	can	know	his	specific	symptoms	from	the	
Bhagavad-
gītā
.	Most	important	is	how	the	man	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	speaks,	for
speech	is	the	most	important	quality	of	any	man.	It	is	said	that	a	fool	is
undiscovered	as	long	as	he	does	not	speak,	and	certainly	a	well-dressed	fool
cannot	be	identified	unless	he	speaks,	but	as	soon	as	he	speaks,	he	reveals
himself	at	once.	The	immediate	symptom	of	a	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	man	is	that	he
speaks	only	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	of	matters	relating	to	Him.	Other	symptoms	then
automatically	follow,	as	stated	below.
TEXT	55
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
प ् र ज ह ा ि त
	
य द ा
	
क ा म ा ᇳ स व ा ᆼ ᇳ प ा थ ᆼ
	
म न ो ग त ा न ्
	
।
आ ᇰ म ᇳ य े व ा ᇰ म न ा
	
त ु ᇾ ट ः
	
ि ᇿ थ त प ् र ᇥ ᇿ त द ो ᇫ य त े
	
॥
५ ५
॥
śrī-bhagavān	uvāca
prajahāti	yadā	kāmān
sarvān	pārtha	mano-gatān
ātmany	evātmanā	tuṣṭaḥ
sthita-prajñas	tadocyate
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;
	prajahāti
—gives	up;	
yadā—
when;	
kāmān—
desires	for	sense	gratification;	
sarvān—
of
all	varieties;	
pārtha
—O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
manaḥ-gatān—
of	mental	concoction;
ātmani—
in	the	pure	state	of	the	soul;	
eva—
certainly;	
ātmanā—
by	the	purified
mind;	
tuṣṭaḥ—
satisfied;	
sthita-prajñaḥ—
transcendentally	situated;	
tadā—
at
that	time;	
ucyate—
is	said.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	O	Pārtha,	when	a	man	gives	up	all	varieties	of
sense	desire	which	arise	from	mental	concoction,	and	when	his	mind	findssatisfaction	in	the	self	alone,	then	he	is	said	to	be	in	pure	transcendental
consciousness.
PURPORT
The	
Bhāgavatam	
affirms	that	any	person	who	is	fully	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	or	devotional	service	of	the	Lord,	has	all	the	good	qualities	of
the	great	sages,	whereas	a	person	who	is	not	so	transcendentally	situated	has
no	good	qualifications,	because	he	is	sure	to	be	taking	refuge	in	his	own
mental	concoctions.	Consequently,	it	is	rightly	said	herein	that	one	has	to	give
up	all	kinds	of	sense	desire	manufactured	by	mental	concoction.	Artificially,
such	sense	desires	cannot	be	stopped.	But	if	one	is	engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	then,	automatically,	sense	desires	subside	without	extraneous
efforts.	Therefore,	one	has	to	engage	himself	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	without
hesitation,	for	this	devotional	service	will	instantly	help	one	on	to	the	platform
of	transcendental	consciousness.	The	highly	developed	soul	always	remains
satisfied	in	himself	by	realizing	himself	as	the	eternal	servitor	of	the	Supreme
Lord.	Such	a	transcendentally	situated	person	has	no	sense	desires	resulting
from	petty	materialism;	rather,	he	remains	always	happy	in	his	natural	position
of	eternally	serving	the	Supreme	Lord.
TEXT	56
द ु ः ख े ᇾ व न ु द ् ि व ᇩ न म न ा ः
	
स ु ख े ष ु
	
ि व ग त ᇿ प ृ ह ः
	
।
व ी त र ा ग भ य क ् र ो ध ः
	
ि ᇿ थ त ध ी म ु ᆼ ि न ኄ ᇫ य त े
	
॥
५ ६
॥
duḥkheṣv	anudvigna-manāḥ
sukheṣu	vigata-spṛhaḥ
vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhaḥ
sthita-dhīr	munir	ucyate
duḥkheṣu
—in	the	threefold	miseries;	
anudvigna-manāḥ—
without	being
agitated	in	mind;	
sukheṣu—
in	happiness;	
vigata-spṛhaḥ—
without	being	too
interested;	
vīta—
free	from;	
rāga—
attachment;	
bhaya—
fear;	
krodhaḥ—
anger;
sthita-dhīḥ—
one	who	is	steady;	
muniḥ—
sage;	
ucyate—
is	called.
TRANSLATIONOne	who	is	not	disturbed	in	spite	of	the	threefold	miseries,	who	is	not
elated	when	there	is	happiness,	and	who	is	free	from	attachment,	fear	and
anger,	is	called	a	sage	of	steady	mind.
PURPORT
The	word	
muni	
means	one	who	can	agitate	his	mind	in	various	ways	for
mental	speculation	without	coming	to	a	factual	conclusion.	It	is	said	that	every
muni	
has	a	different	angle	of	vision,	and	unless	a	
muni	
differs	from	other
munis,	
he	cannot	be	called	a	
muni	
in	the	strict	sense	of	the	term.	
Nāsau	munir
yasya	mataṁ	na	binnam.	
But	a	
sthita-dhī-muni	
as	mentioned	herein	by	the
Lord,	is	different	from	an	ordinary	
muni	
The	
sthita-dhī-muni
	is	always	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	for	he	has	exhausted	all	his	business	of	creative
speculation.	He	has	surpassed	the	stage	of	mental	speculations	and	has	come
to	the	conclusion	that	Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa,	or	Vāsudeva,	is	everything.	He	is	called
a	
muni	
fixed	in	mind.	Such	a	fully	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	is	not	at	all
disturbed	by	the	onslaughts	of	the	threefold	miseries,	for	he	accepts	all
miseries	as	the	mercy	of	the	Lord,	thinking	himself	only	worthy	of	more
trouble	due	to	his	past	misdeeds;	and	he	sees	that	his	miseries,	by	the	grace	of
the	Lord,	are	minimized	to	the	lowest.	Similarly,	when	he	is	happy	he	gives
credit	to	the	Lord,	thinking	himself	unworthy	of	the	happiness;	he	realizes	that
it	is	due	only	to	the	Lord's	grace	that	he	is	in	such	a	comfortable	condition	and
able	to	render	better	service	to	the	Lord.	And,	for	the	service	of	the	Lord,	he	is
always	daring	and	active	and	is	not	influenced	by	attachment	or	aversion.
Attachment	means	accepting	things	for	one's	own	sense	gratification,	and
detachment	is	the	absence	of	such	sensual	attachment.	But	one	fixed	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	has	neither	attachment	nor	detachment	because	his	life	is
dedicated	in	the	service	of	the	Lord.	Consequently	he	is	not	at	all	angry	even
when	his	attempts	are	unsuccessful.	A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	is	always
steady	in	his	determination.
TEXT	57
य ः
	
स व ᆼ त ् र ा न ि भ ᇿ न े ह ᇿ त ሧ ᇰ प ् र ा ᇴ य
	
श ु भ ा श ु भ म ्
	
।
न ा ि भ न ᇳ द ि त
	
न
	
ሲ े ि ᇾ ट
	
त ᇿ य
	
प ् र ᇥ ा
	
प ् र ि त ि ᇾ ठ त ा
	
॥
५ ७
॥yaḥ	sarvatrānabhisnehas
tat	tat	prāpya	śubhāśubham
nābhinandati	na	dveṣṭi
tasya	prajñā	pratiṣṭhitā
yaḥ—
one	who;	
sarvatra—
everywhere;	
anabhisnehaḥ—
without	affection;
tat—
that;	
tat—
that;	
prāpya—
achieving;	
śubha—
good;	
aśubham—
evil;	
na
—
never;	
abhinandati—
prays;	
na—
never;	
dveṣṭi—
envies;	
tasya—
his;	
prajñā
—
perfect	knowledge;	
pratiṣṭhita—
fixed.
TRANSLATION
He	who	is	without	attachment,	who	does	not	rejoice	when	he	obtains
good,	nor	lament	when	he	obtains	evil,	is	firmly	fixed	in	perfect
knowledge.
PURPORT
There	is	always	some	upheaval	in	the	material	world	which	may	be	good	or
evil.	One	who	is	not	agitated	by	such	material	upheavals,	who	is	unaffected	by
good	and	evil,	is	to	be	understood	to	be	fixed	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	As	long
as	one	is	in	the	material	world	there	is	always	the	possibility	of	good	and	evil
because	this	world	is	full	of	duality.	But	one	who	is	fixed	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	not	affected	by	good	and	evil	because	he	is	simply	concerned
with	Kṛṣṇa,	who	is	all	good	absolute.	Such	consciousness	in	Kṛṣṇa	situates
one	in	a	perfect	transcendental	position	called,	technically,	
samādhi.
TEXT	58
य द ा
	
स ं ह र त े
	
च ा य ं
	
क ू म ो ᆼ ऽ ङ ् ग ा न ी व
	
स व ᆼ श ः
	
।
इ ि ᇳ द ् र य ा ण ी ि ᇳ द ् र य ा थ ᆹ ᇷ य ᇿ त ᇿ य
	
प ् र ᇥ ा
	
प ् र ि त ि ᇾ ठ त ा
	
॥
५ ८
॥
yadā	saṁharate	cāyaṁ
kūrmo	'ṅgānīva	sarvaśaḥ
indriyāṇīndriyārthebhyas
tasya	prajñā	pratiṣṭhitāyadā—
when;	
saṁharate—
winds	up;	
ca—
also;	
ayam—
all	these;	
kūrmaḥ—
tortoise;	
aṅgāni—
limbs;	
iva—
like;	
sarvaśaḥ—
altogether;	
indriyāni—
senses;
indriya-arthebhyaḥ—
from	the	sense	objects;	
tasya—
his;	
prajñā
—
consciousness;	
pratiṣṭhitā—
fixed	up.
TRANSLATION
One	who	is	able	to	withdraw	his	senses	from	sense	objects,	as	the
tortoise	draws	his	limbs	within	the	shell,	is	to	be	understood	as	truly
situated	in	knowledge.
PURPORT
The	test	of	a	
yogī
,	devotee,	or	self-realized	soul	is	that	he	is	able	to	control
the	senses	according	to	his	plan.	Most	people,	however,	are	servants	of	the
senses	and	are	thus	directed	by	the	dictation	of	the	senses.	That	is	the	answer
to	the	question	as	to	how	the	
yogī
	is	situated.	The	senses	are	compared	to
venomous	serpents.	They	want	to	act	very	loosely	and	without	restriction.	The
yogī
,	or	the	devotee,	must	be	very	strong	to	control	the	serpents–like	a	snake
charmer.	He	never	allows	them	to	act	independently.	There	are	many
injunctions	in	the	revealed	scriptures;	some	of	them	are	do-not's,	and	some	of
them	are	do's.	Unless	one	is	able	to	follow	the	do's	and	the	do-not's,	restricting
oneself	from	sense	enjoyment,	it	is	not	possible	to	be	firmly	fixed	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	The	best	example,	set	herein,	is	the	tortoise.	The	tortoise	can	at
any	moment	wind	up	his	senses	and	exhibit	them	again	at	any	time	for
particular	purposes.	Similarly,	the	senses	of	the	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	persons	are
used	only	for	some	particular	purpose	in	the	service	of	the	Lord	and	are
withdrawn	otherwise.	Keeping	the	senses	always	in	the	service	of	the	Lord	is
the	example	set	by	the	analogy	of	the	tortoise,	who	keeps	the	senses	within.
TEXT	59
ि व ष य ा
	
ि व ि न व त ᆼ ᇳ त े
	
ि न र ा ह ा र ᇿ य
	
द े ि ह न ः
	
।
र स व ज ᆾ
	
र स ो ऽ ᇴ य ᇿ य
	
प र ं
	
द ृ ᇾ ट ् व ा
	
ि न व त ᆼ त े
	
॥
५ ९
॥
viṣayā	vinivartantenirāhārasya	dehinaḥ
rasa-varjaṁ	raso	'py	asya
paraṁ	dṛṣṭvā	nivartate
viṣayāḥ—
objects	for	sense	enjoyment;	
vinivartante—
are	practiced	to	be
refrained	from;	
nirāhārasya—
by	negative	restrictions;	
dehinaḥ—
for	the
embodied;	
rasa-varjam—
giving	up	the	taste;	
rasaḥ—
sense	of	enjoyment;	
api
—
although	there	is;	
asya—
his;	
param—
far	superior	things;	
dṛṣṭvā—
by
experiencing;	
nivartate—
ceases	from.
TRANSLATION
The	embodied	soul	may	be	restricted	from	sense	enjoyment,	though	the
taste	for	sense	objects	remains.	But,	ceasing	such	engagements	by
experiencing	a	higher	taste,	he	is	fixed	in	consciousness.
PURPORT
Unless	one	is	transcendentally	situated,	it	is	not	possible	to	cease	from
sense	enjoyment.	The	process	of	restriction	from	sense	enjoyment	by	rules
and	regulations	is	something	like	restricting	a	diseased	person	from	certain
types	of	eatables.	The	patient,	however,	neither	likes	such	restrictions,	nor
loses	his	taste	for	eatables.	Similarly,	sense	restriction	by	some	spiritual
process	like	
aṣṭāṅga-yoga
,	in	the	matter	of	
yama,	niyama,	āsana,	prāṇāyāma,
pratyāhāra,	dharaṇā,	dhyāna,	
etc.,	is	recommended	for	less	intelligent
persons	who	have	no	better	knowledge.	But	one	who	has	tasted	the	beauty	of
the	Supreme	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	in	the	course	of	his	advancement	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	no	longer	has	a	taste	for	dead	material	things.	Therefore,
restrictions	are	there	for	the	less	intelligent	neophytes	in	the	spiritual
advancement	of	life,	but	such	restrictions	are	only	good	if	one	actually	has	a
taste	for	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	When	one	is	actually	Kṛṣṇa	conscious,	he
automatically	loses	his	taste	for	pale	things.
TEXT	60
य त त ो
	
ቋ ि प
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
प ु ኄ ष ᇿ य
	
ि व प ि ᇽ च त ः
	
।इ ि ᇳ द ् र य ा ि ण
	
प ् र म ा थ ी ि न
	
ह र ि ᇳ त
	
प ् र स भ ं
	
म न ः
	
॥
६ ०
॥
yatato	hy	api	kaunteya
puruṣasya	vipaścitaḥ
indriyāṇi	pramāthīni
haranti	prasabhaṁ	manaḥ
yatataḥ—
while	endeavoring;	
hi—
certainly;	
api—
in	spite	of;	
kaunteya—
O
son	of	Kuntī;	
puruṣasya—
of	the	man;	
vipaścitaḥ—
full	of	discriminating
knowledge;	
indriyāṇi—
the	senses;	
pramāthīni—
stimulated;	
haranti—
throws
forcefully;	
prasabhaṁ—
by	force;	
manaḥ—
the	mind.
TRANSLATION
The	senses	are	so	strong	and	impetuous,	O	Arjuna,	that	they	forcibly
carry	away	the	mind	even	of	a	man	of	discrimination	who	is	endeavoring
to	control	them.
PURPORT
There	are	many	learned	sages,	philosophers	and	transcendentalists	who	try
to	conquer	the	senses,	but	in	spite	of	their	endeavors,	even	the	greatest	of	them
sometimes	fall	victim	to	material	sense	enjoyment	due	to	the	agitated	mind.
Even	Viśvāmitra,	a	great	sage	and	perfect	
yogī
,	was	misled	by	Menakā	into
sex	enjoyment,	although	the	
yogī	
was	endeavoring	for	sense	control	with
severe	types	of	penance	and	
yoga
	practice.	And,of	course,	there	are	so	many
similar	instances	in	the	history	of	the	world.	Therefore,	it	is	very	difficult	to
control	the	mind	and	the	senses	without	being	fully	Kṛṣṇa	conscious.	Without
engaging	the	mind	in	Kṛṣṇa,	one	cannot	cease	such	material	engagements.	A
practical	example	is	given	by	Śrī	Yāmunācārya,	a	great	saint	and	devotee,
who	says:	"Since	my	mind	has	been	engaged	in	the	service	of	the	lotus	feet	of
Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	and	I	have	been	enjoying	an	ever	new	transcendental	humor,
whenever	I	think	of	sex	life	with	a	woman,	my	face	at	once	turns	from	it,	and	I
spit	at	the	thought."
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	such	a	transcendentally	nice	thing	that	automatically
material	enjoyment	becomes	distasteful.	It	is	as	if	a	hungry	man	had	satisfied
his	hunger	by	a	sufficient	quantity	of	nutritious	eatables.	Mahārāja	Ambarīṣaalso	conquered	a	great	
yogī,	
Durvāsā	Muni,	simply	because	his	mind	was
engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
TEXT	61
त ा ि न
	
स व ा ᆼ ि ण
	
स ं य ᇸ य
	
य ु ᇧ त
	
आ स ी त
	
म ᇰ प र ः
	
।
व श े
	
ि ह
	
य ᇿ य े ि ᇳ द ् र य ा ि ण
	
त ᇿ य
	
प ् र ᇥ ा
	
प ् र ि त ि ᇾ ठ त ा
	
॥
६ १
॥
tāni	sarvāṇi	saṁyamya
yukta	āsīta	mat-paraḥ
vaśe	hi	yasyendriyāṇi
tasya	prajñā	pratiṣṭhitā
tāni—
those	senses;	
sarvāṇi—
all;	
saṁyamya—
keeping	under	control;	
yuktaḥ
—
being	engaged;	
āsīta—
being	so	situated;	
mat-paraḥ
—in	relationship	with
Me;	
vaśe—
in	full	subjugation;	
hi—
certainly;	
yasya—
one	whose;	
indriyāṇi
—
senses;	
tasya—
his;	
prajñā—
consciousness;	
pratiṣṭhitā—
fixed.
TRANSLATION
One	who	restrains	his	senses	and	fixes	his	consciousness	upon	Me	is
known	as	a	man	of	steady	intelligence.
PURPORT
That	the	highest	conception	of	
yoga
	perfection	is	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is
clearly	explained	in	this	verse.	And,	unless	one	is	Kṛṣṇa	conscious,	it	is	not	at
all	possible	to	control	the	senses.	As	cited	above,	the	great	sage	Durvāsā	Muni
picked	a	quarrel	with	Mahārāja	Ambarīṣa,	and	Durvāsā	Muni	unnecessarily
became	angry	out	of	pride	and	therefore	could	not	check	his	senses.	On	the
other	hand,	the	King,	although	not	as	powerful	a	
yogī	
as	the	sage,	but	a
devotee	of	the	Lord,	silently	tolerated	all	the	sage's	injustices	and	thereby
emerged	victorious.	The	King	was	able	to	control	his	senses	because	of	the
following	qualifications,	as	mentioned	in	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:
sa	vai	manaḥ	kṛṣṇa-padāravindayorvacāṁsi	vaikuṇṭha-guṇānavarṇane
karau	harer	mandira-mārjanādiṣu
śrutiṁ	cakārācyuta-sat-kathodaye
mukunda-liṅgālaya-darśane	dṛśau
tad-bhṛtya-gātra-sparśe'ṅga-saṅgamam
ghrāṇaṁ	ca	tat-pāda-saroja-saurabhe
śrīmat-tulasyā	rasanāṁ	tad-arpite
pādau	hareḥ	kṣetra-padānusarpaṇe
śiro	hṛṣīkeśa-padābhivandane
kāmaṁ	ca	dāsye	na	tu	kāma-kāmyayā
yathottamaśloka-janāśrayā	ratiḥ
"King	Ambarīṣa	fixed	his	mind	on	the	lotus	feet	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	engaged	his
words	in	describing	the	abode	of	the	Lord,	his	hands	in	cleansing	the	temple
of	the	Lord,	his	ears	in	hearing	the	pastimes	of	the	Lord,	his	eyes	in	seeing	the
form	of	the	Lord,	his	body	in	touching	the	body	of	the	devotee,	his	nostrils	in
smelling	the	flavor	of	the	flowers	offered	to	the	lotus	feet	of	the	Lord,	his
tongue	in	tasting	the	
tulasī	
leaves	offered	to	Him,	his	legs	in	traveling	to	the
holy	place	where	His	temple	is	situated,	his	head	in	offering	obeisances	unto
the	Lord,	and	his	desires	in	fulfilling	the	desires	of	the	Lord	...	and	all	these
qualifications	made	him	fit	to	become	a	
mat-paraḥ	
devotee	of	the	Lord."
(Bhāg.	
9.4.18-20)
The	word	
mat-paraḥ
	is	most	significant	in	this	connection.	How	one	can
become	a	
mat-paraḥ	
is	described	in	the	life	of	Mahārāja	Ambarīṣa.	Śrīla
Baladeva	Vidyābhūṣaṇa,	a	great	scholar	and	
ācārya	
in	the	line	of	the	
mat-
paraḥ,	
remarks:	
"mad-bhakti-prabhāvena	sarvendriya-vijaya-pūrvikā	svātma
dṛṣṭiḥ	sulabheti	bhāvaḥ."	
"The	senses	can	be	completely	controlled	only	by
the	strength	of	devotional	service	to	Kṛṣṇa."	Also,	the	example	of	fire	is
sometimes	given:	"As	the	small	flames	within	burn	everything	within	the
room,	similarly	Lord	Viṣṇu,	situated	in	the	heart	of	the	
yogī,	
burns	up	all	kinds
of	impurities."	The	
Yoga-sūtra	
also	prescribes	meditation	on	Viṣṇu,	and	not
meditation	on	the	void.	The	so-called	
yogīs	
who	meditate	on	something	which
is	not	the	Viṣṇu	form	simply	waste	their	time	in	a	vain	search	after	some
phantasmagoria.	We	have	to	be	Kṛṣṇa	conscious–devoted	to	the	Personality	of
Godhead.	This	is	the	aim	of	the	real	
yoga.TEXT	62
ᇲ य ा य त ो
	
ि व ष य ा ᇳ प ु ं स ः
	
स ङ ् ग ᇿ त े ष ू प ज ा य त े
	
।
स ङ ् ग ा ᇰ स ᇮ ज ा य त े
	
क ा म ः
	
क ा म ा ᇰ क ् र ो ध ो ऽ ि भ ज ा य त े
	
॥
६ २
॥
dhyāyato	viṣayān	puṁsaḥ
saṅgas	teṣūpajāyate
saṅgāt	sañjāyate	kāmaḥ
kāmāt	krodho	'bhijāyate
dhyāyataḥ—
while	contemplating;	
viṣayān—
sense	objects;	
puṁsaḥ—
of	the
person;	
saṅgaḥ—
attachment;	
teṣu—
in	the	sense	objects;	
upajāyate—
develops;
saṅgāt—
attachment;	
sañjāyate—
develops;	
kāmaḥ—
desire;	
kāmāt—
from
desire;	
krodhaḥ—
anger;	
abhijāyate—
becomes	manifest.
TRANSLATION
While	contemplating	the	objects	of	the	senses,	a	person	develops
attachment	for	them,	and	from	such	attachment	lust	develops,	and	from
lust	anger	arises.
PURPORT
One	who	is	not	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	is	subjected	to	material	desires	while
contemplating	the	objects	of	senses.	The	senses	require	real	engagements,	and
if	they	are	not	engaged	in	the	transcendental	loving	service	of	the	Lord,	they
will	certainly	seek	engagement	in	the	service	of	materialism.	In	the	material
world	everyone,	including	Lord	Śiva	and	Lord	Brahmā
—
to	say	nothing	of
other	demigods	in	the	heavenly	planets
—
is	subjected	to	the	influence	of	sense
objects,	and	the	only	method	to	get	out	of	this	puzzle	of	material	existence	is
to	become	Kṛṣṇa	conscious.	Lord	Śiva	was	deep	in	meditation,	but	when
Pārvatī	agitated	him	for	sense	pleasure,	he	agreed	to	the	proposal,	and	as	a
result	Kārtikeya	was	born.	When	Haridāsa	Ṭhākur	was	a	young	devotee	of	the
Lord,	he	was	similarly	allured	by	the	incarnation	of	Māyā	Devī,	but	Haridāsa
easily	passed	the	test	because	of	his	unalloyed	devotion	to	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.	As
illustrated	in	the	above-mentioned	verse	of	Śrī	Yāmunācārya,	a	sinceredevotee	of	the	Lord	shuns	all	material	sense	enjoyment	due	to	his	higher	taste
for	spiritual	enjoyment	in	the	association	of	the	Lord.	That	is	the	secret	of
success.	One	who	is	not,	therefore,	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	however	powerful
he	may	be	in	controlling	the	senses	by	artificial	repression,	is	sure	ultimately
to	fail,	for	the	slightest	thought	of	sense	pleasure	will	agitate	him	to	gratify	his
desires.
TEXT	63
क ् र ो ध ा द ् भ व ि त
	
स ᇸ म ो ह ः
	
स ᇸ म ो ह ा ᇰ ᇿ म ृ ि त ि व भ ् र म ः
	
।
ᇿ म ृ ि त भ ् र ं श ा ሮ ु द ् ि ध न ा श ो
	
ब ु द ् ि ध न ा श ा ᇰ प ् र ण ᇽ य ि त
	
॥
६ ३
॥
krodhād	bhavati	saṁmohaḥ
saṁmohāt	smṛti-vibhramaḥ
smṛti-bhraṁśād	buddhi-nāśo
buddhi-nāśāt	praṇaśyati
krodhāt—
from	anger;	
bhavati—
takes	place;	
saṁmohaḥ—
perfect	illusion;
saṁmohāt—
from	illusion;	
smṛti—
of	memory;	
vibhramaḥ—
bewilderment;
smṛti-bhraṁśāt—
after	bewilderment	of	memory;	
buddhi-nāśaḥ—
loss	of
intelligence;	
buddhi-nāśāt—
and	from	loss	of	intelligence;	
praṇaśyati—
falls
down.
TRANSLATION
From	anger,	delusion	arises,	and	from	delusion	bewilderment	of
memory.	When	memory	is	bewildered,	intelligence	is	lost,	and	when
intelligence	is	lost,	one	falls	down	again	into	the	material	pool.
PURPORT
By	development	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	one	can	know	that	everything	has
its	use	in	the	service	of	the	Lord.	Those	who	are	without	knowledge	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	artificially	try	to	avoid	material	objects,	and	as	a	result,
although	they	desire	liberation	from	material	bondage,	they	do	not	attain	to	the
perfect	stage	of	renunciation.	On	the	other	hand,	a	person	in	Kṛṣṇaconsciousness	knows	how	to	use	everything	in	the	service	of	the	Lord;
therefore	he	does	not	become	a	victim	of	material	consciousness.	For
example,	for	an	impersonalist,	the	Lord,	or	the	Absolute,	being	impersonal,
cannot	eat.	Whereas	an	impersonalist	tries	to	avoid	good	eatables,	a	devotee
knows	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	supreme	enjoyer	and	that	He	eats	all	that	is	offered	to
Him	in	devotion.	So,	after	offering	good	eatables	to	the	Lord,	the	devotee
takes	the	remnants,	called	
prasādam.	
Thus	everything	becomes	spiritualized
and	there	is	no	danger	of	a	downfall.	The	devotee	takes	
prasādam	
in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	whereas	the	nondevotee	rejects	it	as	material.	The
impersonalist,	therefore,	cannot	enjoy	life	due	to	his	artificial	renunciation;
and	for	this	reason,	a	slight	agitation	of	the	mind	pulls	him	down	again	into
the	pool	of	material	existence.	It	is	said	that	such	a	soul,	even	though	rising	up
to	the	point	of	liberation,	falls	down	again	due	to	his	not	having	support	in
devotional	service.
TEXT	64
र ा ग ሲ े ष ि व म ु ᇧ त ै ᇿ त ु
	
ि व ष य ा ि न ि ᇳ द ् र य ै ᇽ च र न ्
	
।
	
आ ᇰ म व ᇽ य ै ि व ᆼ ध े य ा ᇰ म ा
	
प ् र स ा द म ि ध ग ᇫ छ ि त
	
॥
६ ४
॥
rāga-dveṣa-vimuktais	tu
viṣayān	indriyaiś	caran
ātma-vaśyair	vidheyātmā
prasādam	adhigacchati
rāga—
attachment;	
dveṣa
—detachment;	
vimuktaiḥ—
by	one	who	has	been
free	from	such	things;	
tu—
but;	
viṣayān—
sense	objects;	
indriyaiḥ—
by	the
senses;	
caran—
acting;	
ātma-vaśyaiḥ—
one	who	has	control	over;	
vidheyātmā
—one	who	follows	regulated	freedom;	
prasādam—
the	mercy	of	the	Lord;
adhigacchati—
attains.
TRANSLATION
One	who	can	control	his	senses	by	practicing	the	regulated	principles	of
freedom	can	obtain	the	complete	mercy	of	the	Lord	and	thus	become	free
from	all	attachment	and	aversion.PURPORT
It	is	already	explained	that	one	may	externally	control	the	senses	by	some
artificial	process,	but	unless	the	senses	are	engaged	in	the	transcendental
service	of	the	Lord,	there	is	every	chance	of	a	fall.	Although	the	person	in	full
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	may	apparently	be	on	the	sensual	plane,	because	of	his
being	Kṛṣṇa	conscious,	he	has	no	attachment	to	sensual	activities.	The	Kṛṣṇa
conscious	person	is	concerned	only	with	the	satisfaction	of	Kṛṣṇa,	and	nothing
else.	Therefore	he	is	transcendental	to	all	attachment.	If	Kṛṣṇa	wants,	the
devotee	can	do	anything	which	is	ordinarily	undesirable;	and	if	Kṛṣṇa	does	not
want,	he	shall	not	do	that	which	he	would	have	ordinarily	done	for	his	own
satisfaction.	Therefore	to	act	or	not	to	act	is	within	his	control	because	he	acts
only	under	the	direction	of	Kṛṣṇa.	This	consciousness	is	the	causeless	mercy
of	the	Lord,	which	the	devotee	can	achieve	in	spite	of	his	being	attached	to	the
sensual	platform.
TEXT	65
प ् र स ा द े
	
स व ᆼद ु ः ख ा न ा ं
	
ह ा ि न र ᇿ य ो प ज ा य त े
	
।
प ् र स ᇳ न च े त स ो
	
ቋ ा श ु
	
ब ु द ् ि ध ः
	
प य ᆼ व ि त ᇾ ठ त े
	
॥
६ ५
॥
prasāde	sarva-duḥkhānāṁ
hānir	asyopajāyate
prasanna-cetaso	hy	āśu
buddhiḥ	paryavatiṣṭhate
prasāde—
on	achievement	of	the	causeless	mercy	of	the	Lord;	
sarva—
all;
duḥkhānām—
material	miseries;	
hāniḥ—
destruction;	
asya—
his;	
upajāyate	
—
takes	place;	
prasanna-cetasaḥ—
of	the	happy-minded;	
hi—
certainly;	
āśu—
very	soon;	
buddhiḥ—
intelligence;	
pari—
sufficiently;	
avatiṣṭhate—
established.
TRANSLATION
For	one	who	is	so	situated	in	the	Divine	consciousness,	the	threefold
miseries	of	material	existence	exist	no	longer;	in	such	a	happy	state,	one's
intelligence	soon	becomes	steady.TEXT	66
न ा ि ᇿ त
	
ब ु द ् ि ध र य ु ᇧ त ᇿ य
	
न
	
च ा य ु ᇧ त ᇿ य
	
भ ा व न ा
	
।
न
	
च ा भ ा व य त ः
	
श ा ि ᇳ त र श ा ᇳ त ᇿ य
	
क ु त ः
	
स ु ख म ्
	
॥
६ ६
॥
nāsti	buddhir	ayuktasya
na	cāyuktasya	bhāvanā
na	cābhāvayataḥ	śāntir
aśāntasya	kutaḥ	sukham
na	asti—
there	cannot	be;	
buddhiḥ—
transcendental	intelligence;	
ayuktasya
—
of	one	who	is	not	connected	(with	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness);	
na—
neither;	
ca
—
and;	
ayuktasya—
of	one	devoid	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness;	
bhāvanā—
mind
fixed	in	happiness;	
na—
neither;	
ca—
and;	
abhāvayataḥ—
one	who	is	not	fixed;
śāntiḥ—
peace;	
aśāntasya—
of	the	unpeaceful;	
kutaḥ—
where	is;	
sukham—
happiness.
TRANSLATION
One	who	is	not	in	transcendental	consciousness	can	have	neither	a
controlled	mind	nor	steady	intelligence,	without	which	there	is	no
possibility	of	peace.	And	how	can	there	be	any	happiness	without	peace?
PURPORT
Unless	one	is	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	there	is	no	possibility	of	peace.	So	it
is	confirmed	in	the	Fifth	Chapter	(5.29)	that	when	one	understands	that	Kṛṣṇa
is	the	only	enjoyer	of	all	the	good	results	of	sacrifice	and	penance,	and	that	He
is	the	proprietor	of	all	universal	manifestations,	that	He	is	the	real	friend	of	all
living	entities,	then	only	can	one	have	real	peace.	Therefore,	if	one	is	not	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	there	cannot	be	a	final	goal	for	the	mind.	Disturbance	is
due	to	want	of	an	ultimate	goal,	and	when	one	is	certain	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the
enjoyer,	proprietor	and	friend	of	everyone	and	everything,	then	one	can,	with	a
steady	mind,	bring	about	peace.	Therefore,	one	who	is	engaged	without	a
relationship	with	Kṛṣṇa	is	certainly	always	in	distress	and	is	without	peace,
however	much	one	may	make	a	show	of	peace	and	spiritual	advancement	in
life.	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	a	self-manifested	peaceful	condition	which	can	beachieved	only	in	relationship	with	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	67
इ ि ᇳ द ् र य ा ण ा ं
	
ि ह
	
च र त ा ं
	
य ᇳ म न ो ऽ न ु ि व ध ी य त े
	
।
त द ᇿ य
	
ह र ि त
	
प ् र ᇥ ा ं
	
व ा य ु न ा ᆼ व ि म व ा ᇸ भ ि स
	
॥
६ ७
॥
indriyāṇāṁ	hi	caratāṁ
yan	mano	'nuvidhīyate
tad	asya	harati	prajñāṁ
vāyur	nāvam	ivāmbhasi
indriyāṇām—
of	the	senses;	
hi—
certainly;	
caratām—
while	herding	over;	
yat
—
that;	
manaḥ—
mind;	
anuvidhīyate—
becomes	constantly	engaged;	
tat—	
that;
asya—
his;	
harati—
takes	away;	
prajñām—
intelligence;	
vāyuḥ—
wind;	
nāvam
—
a	boat;	
iva—
like;	
ambhasi—
on	the	water.
TRANSLATION
As	a	boat	on	the	water	is	swept	away	by	a	strong	wind,	even	one	of	the
senses	on	which	the	mind	focuses	can	carry	away	a	man's	intelligence.
PURPORT
Unless	all	of	the	senses	are	engaged	in	the	service	of	the	Lord,	even	one	of
them	engaged	in	sense	gratification	can	deviate	the	devotee	from	the	path	of
transcendental	advancement.	As	mentioned	in	the	life	of	Mahārāja	Ambarīṣa,
all	of	the	senses	must	be	engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	for	that	is	the
correct	technique	for	controlling	the	mind.
TEXT	68
त ᇿ म ा ሱ ᇿ य
	
म ह ा ब ा ह ो
	
ि न ग ृ ह ी त ा ि न
	
स व ᆼ श ः
	
।
इ ि ᇳ द ् र य ा ण ी ि ᇳ द ् र य ा थ ᆹ ᇷ य ᇿ त ᇿ य
	
प ् र ᇥ ा
	
प ् र ि त ि ᇾ ठ त ा
	
॥
६ ८
॥tasmād	yasya	mahā-bāho
nigṛhītāni	sarvaśaḥ
indriyāṇīndriyārthebhyas
tasya	prajñā	pratiṣṭhitā
tasmāt—
therefore;	
yasya—
of	one's;	
mahā-bāho—
O	mighty-armed	one;
nigṛhītāni—
so	curbed	down;	
sarvaśaḥ—
all	around;	
indriyāṇi—
the	senses;
indriya-arthebhyaḥ—
for	the	sake	of	sense	objects;	
tasya—
his;
	prajñā—
intelligence;	
pratiṣṭhitā—
fixed.
TRANSLATION
Therefore,	O	mighty-armed,	one	whose	senses	are	restrained	from	their
objects	is	certainly	of	steady	intelligence.
PURPORT
As	enemies	are	curbed	by	superior	force,	similarly,	the	senses	can	be	curbed
not	by	any	human	endeavor,	but	only	by	keeping	them	engaged	in	the	service
of	the	Lord.	One	who	has	understood	this
—
that	only	by	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness
is	one	really	established	in	intelligence	and	that	one	should	practice	this	art
under	the	guidance	of	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master
—
is	called	
sādhaka,	
or	a
suitable	candidate	for	liberation.
TEXT	69
य ा
	
ि न श ा
	
स व ᆼ भ ू त ा न ा ं
	
त ᇿ य ा ं
	
ज ा ग ि त ᆼ
	
स ं य म ी
	
।
य ᇿ य ा ं
	
ज ा ग ् र ि त
	
भ ू त ा ि न
	
स ा
	
ि न श ा
	
प ᇽ य त ो
	
म ु न े ः
	
॥
६ ९
॥
yā	niśā	sarva-bhūtānāṁ
tasyāṁ	jāgarti	saṁyamī
yasyāṁ	jāgrati	bhūtāni
sā	niśā	paśyato	muneḥ
yā—
what;	
niśā—
is	night;	
sarva—
all;	
bhūtānām—
of	living	entities;	
tasyām
—
in	that;	
jāgarti—
wakeful;	
saṁyamī—
the	self-controlled;	
yasyām—
in	which;jāgrati—
awake;	
bhūtāni—
all	beings;	
sā—
that	is;	
niśā—
night;	
paśyataḥ—
for
the	introspective;	
muneḥ—
sage.
TRANSLATION
What	is	night	for	all	beings	is	the	time	of	awakening	for	the	self-
controlled;	and	the	time	of	awakening	for	all	beings	is	night	for	the
introspective	sage.
PURPORT
There	are	two	classes	of	intelligent	men.	The	one	is	intelligent	in	material
activities	for	sense	gratification,	and	the	other	is	introspective	and	awake	to
the	cultivation	of	self-realization.	Activities	of	the	introspective	sage,	or
thoughtful	man,	are	night	for	persons	materially	absorbed.	Materialistic
persons	remain	asleep	in	such	a	night	due	to	their	ignorance	of	self-
realization.	The	introspective	sage	remains	alert	in	the	"night"	of	the
materialistic	men.	The	sage	feels	transcendental	pleasure	in	the	gradual
advancement	of	spiritual	culture,	whereas	the	man	in	materialistic	activities,
being	asleep	to	self-realization,	dreams	of	varieties	of	sense	pleasure,	feeling
sometimes	happy	and	sometimes	distressed	in	his	sleeping	condition.	The
introspective	man	is	always	indifferent	to	materialistic	happiness	and	distress.
He	goes	on	with	his	self-realization	activities	undisturbed	by	material	reaction.
TEXT	70
आ प ू य ᆼ म ा ण म च ल प ् र ि त ᇾ ठ ं
	
स म ु द ् र म ा प ः
	
प ् र ि व श ि ᇳ त
	
य ሲ त ्
	
।
त ሲ ᇰ क ा म ा
	
य ं
	
प ् र ि व श ि ᇳ त
	
स व ᆹ
	
स
	
श ा ि ᇳ त म ा ᇴ न ो ि त
	
न
	
क ा म क ा म ी
	
॥
७ ०
॥
āpūryamāṇam	acala-pratiṣṭhaṁ
samudram	āpaḥ	praviśanti	yadvat
tadvat	kāmā	yaṁ	praviśanti	sarve
sa	śāntim	āpnoti	na	kāma-kāmīāpūryamāṇam—
always	filled;	
acala-pratiṣṭham—
steadily	situated;
samudram—
the	ocean;	
āpaḥ—
water;	
praviśanti—
enter;	
yadvat—
as;	
tadvat
—
so;	
kāmāḥ—
desires;	
yam—
unto	one;	
praviśanti—
enter;	
sarve—
all;	
saḥ
—
that	person;	
śāntim—
peace;	
āpnoti—
achieves;	
na—
not;	
kāma-kāmī—
one
who	desires	to	fulfill	desires.
TRANSLATION
A	person	who	is	not	disturbed	by	the	incessant	flow	of	desires—that
enter	like	rivers	into	the	ocean	which	is	ever	being	filled	but	is	always	still
—	can	alone	achieve	peace,	and	not	the	man	who	strives	to	satisfy	such
desires.
PURPORT
Although	the	vast	ocean	is	always	filled	with	water,	it	is	always,	especially
during	the	rainy	season,	being	filled	with	much	more	water.	But	the	ocean
remains	the	same–steady;	it	is	not	agitated,	nor	does	it	cross	beyond	the	limit
of	its	brink.	That	is	also	true	of	a	person	fixed	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	As	long
as	one	has	the	material	body,	the	demands	of	the	body	for	sense	gratification
will	continue.	The	devotee,	however,	is	not	disturbed	by	such	desires	because
of	his	fullness.	A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	man	is	not	in	need	of	anything	because	the
Lord	fulfills	all	his	material	necessities.	Therefore	he	is	like	the	ocean–always
full	in	himself.	Desires	may	come	to	him	like	the	waters	of	the	rivers	that	flow
into	the	ocean,	but	he	is	steady	in	his	activities,	and	he	is	not	even	slightly
disturbed	by	desires	for	sense	gratification.	That	is	the	proof	of	a	Kṛṣṇa
conscious	man–one	who	has	lost	all	inclinations	for	material	sense
gratification,	although	the	desires	are	present.	Because	he	remains	satisfied	in
the	transcendental	loving	service	of	the	Lord,	he	can	remain	steady,	like	the
ocean,	and	therefore	enjoy	full	peace.	Others,	however,	who	fulfill	desires
even	up	to	the	limit	of	liberation,	what	to	speak	of	material	success,	never
attain	peace.	The	fruitive	workers,	the	salvationists,	and	also	the	
yogīs	
who	are
after	mystic	powers,	are	all	unhappy	because	of	unfulfilled	desires.	But	the
person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	happy	in	the	service	of	the	Lord,	and	he	has
no	desires	to	be	fulfilled.	In	fact,	he	does	not	even	desire	liberation	from	the
so-called	material	bondage.	The	devotees	of	Kṛṣṇa	have	no	material	desires,
and	therefore	they	are	in	perfect	peace.TEXT	71
ि व ह ा य
	
क ा म ा ᇳ य ः
	
स व ा ᆼ ᇳ प ु म ा ं ᇽ च र ि त
	
ि न ः ᇿ प ृ ह ः
	
।
ि न म ᆼ म ो
	
ि न र ह ङ ् क ा र ः
	
स
	
श ा ि ᇳ त म ि ध ग ᇫ छ ि त
	
॥
७ १
॥
vihāya	kāmān	yaḥ	sarvān
pumāṁś	carati	niḥspṛhaḥ
nirmamo	nirahaṅkāraḥ
sa	śāntim	adhigacchati
vihāya—
after	giving	up;	
kāmān—
all	material	desires	for	sense	gratification;
yaḥ—
the	person;	
sarvān—
all;	
pumān—
a	person;	
carati—
lives;	
nihṣpṛhaḥ	
—
desireless;	
nirmamaḥ—
without	a	sense	of	proprietorship;	
nirahaṅkāraḥ—
without	false	ego;	
saḥ—
all;	
śāntim—
perfect	peace;	
adhigacchati—
attains.
TRANSLATION
A	person	who	has	given	up	all	desires	for	sense	gratification,	who	lives
free	from	desires,	who	has	given	up	all	sense	of	proprietorship	and	is
devoid	of	false	ego–he	alone	can	attain	real	peace.
PURPORT
To	become	desireless	means	not	to	desire	anything	for	sense	gratification.
In	other	words,	desire	for	becoming	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	is	actually
desirelessness.	To	understand	one's	actual	position	as	the	eternal	servitor	of
Kṛṣṇa,	without	falsely	claiming	this	material	body	to	be	oneself	and	without
falsely	claiming	proprietorship	over	anything	in	the	world,	is	the	perfect	stage
of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	One	who	is	situated	in	this	perfect	stage	knows	that
because	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	proprietor	of	everything,	therefore	everything	must	be
used	for	the	satisfaction	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Arjuna	did	not	want	to	fight	for	his	own
sense	satisfaction,	but	when	he	became	fully	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	he	fought
because	Kṛṣṇa	wanted	him	to	fight.	For	himself	there	was	no	desire	to	fight,
but	for	Kṛṣṇa	the	same	Arjuna	fought	to	his	best	ability.	Desire	for	the
satisfaction	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	really	desirelessness;	it	is	not	an	artificial	attempt	to
abolish	desires.	The	living	entity	cannot	be	desireless	or	senseless,	but	he	does
have	to	change	the	quality	of	the	desires.	A	materially	desireless	personcertainly	knows	that	everything	belongs	to	Kṛṣṇa	
(īśāvāsyam	idaṁ	sarvam
),
and	therefore	he	does	not	falsely	claim	proprietorship	over	anything.	This
transcendental	knowledge	is	based	on	self-realization–namely,	knowing
perfectly	well	that	every	living	entity	is	the	eternal	part	and	parcel	of	Kṛṣṇa	in
spiritual	identity.	and	therefore	the	eternal	position	of	the	living	entity	is	never
on	the	level	of	Kṛṣṇa	or	greater	than	Him.	This	understanding	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	the	basic	principle	of	real	peace.
TEXT	72
ए ष ा
	
ब ् र ा ቊ ी
	
ि ᇿ थ ि त ः
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
न ै न ा ं
	
प ् र ा ᇴ य
	
ि व म ु ቋ ि त
	
।
ि ᇿ थ ᇰ व ा ᇿ य ा म ᇳ त क ा ल े ऽ ि प
	
ब ् र ቊ ि न व ा ᆼ ण म ृ ᇫ छ ि त
	
॥
७ २
॥
eṣā	brāhmī	sthitiḥ	pārtha
naināṁ	prāpya	vimuhyati
sthitvāsyām	anta-kāle	'pi
brahma-nirvāṇam	ṛcchati
eṣā—
this;	
brāhmī—
spiritual;	
sthitiḥ—
situation;	
pārtha
—O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
na
—
never;	
enām—
this;	
prāpya—
achieving;	
vimuhyati—
bewilders;	
sthitvā—
being	so	situated;	
asyām—
being	so;	
anta-kāle—
at	the	end	of	life;	
api—
also;
brahma-nirvāṇam—
spiritual	(kingdom	of	God);	
ṛcchati—
attains.
TRANSLATION
That	is	the	way	of	the	spiritual	and	godly	life,	after	attaining	which	a
man	is	not	bewildered.	Being	so	situated,	even	at	the	hour	of	death,	one
can	enter	into	the	kingdom	of	God.
PURPORT
One	can	attain	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	or	divine	life	at	once,	within	a	second-
or	one	may	not	attain	such	a	state	of	life	even	after	millions	of	births.	It	is	only
a	matter	of	understanding	and	accepting	the	fact.	Khaṭvāṅga	Mahārāja	attained
this	state	of	life	just	a	few	minutes	before	his	death,	by	surrendering	unto
Kṛṣṇa.	
Nirvāṇa	
means	ending	the	process	of	materialistic	life.	According	toBuddhist	philosophy,	there	is	only	void	after	the	completion	of	this	material
life,	but	
Bhagavad-gītā	
teaches	differently.	Actual	life	begins	after	the
completion	of	this	material	life.	For	the	gross	materialist	it	is	sufficient	to
know	that	one	has	to	end	this	materialistic	way	of	life,	but	for	persons	who	are
spiritually	advanced,	there	is	another	life	after	this	materialistic	life.	Before
ending	this	life,	if	one	fortunately	becomes	Kṛṣṇa	conscious,	he	at	once	attains
the	stage	of	
Brahma-nirvāṇa.	
There	is	no	difference	between	the	kingdom	of
God	and	the	devotional	service	of	the	Lord.	Since	both	of	them	are	on	the
absolute	plane,	to	be	engaged	in	the	transcendental	loving	service	of	the	Lord
is	to	have	attained	the	spiritual	kingdom.	In	the	material	world	there	are
activities	of	sense	gratification,	whereas	in	the	spiritual	world	there	are
activities	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Attainment	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	even
during	this	life	is	immediate	attainment	of	Brahman,	and	one	who	is	situated
in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	has	certainly	already	entered	into	the	kingdom	of	God.
Brahman	is	just	the	opposite	of	matter.	Therefore	
brāhmī	sthitiḥ	
means	"not
on	the	platform	of	material	activities."	Devotional	service	of	the	Lord	is
accepted	in	the	
Bhagavad-	gītā	
as	the	liberated	stage.	Therefore,	
brāhmī-
sthitiḥ
	is	liberation	from	material	bondage.
Śrīla	Bhaktivinode	Ṭhākur	has	summarized	this	Second	Chapter	of	the
Bhagavad-gītā	
as	being	the	contents	for	the	whole	text.	In	the	
Bhagavad-	gītā,
the	subject	matters	are	
karma-yoga,	jñāna-yoga,	
and	
bhakti-yoga.	
In	the
Second	Chapter	
karma-yoga	
and	
jñāna-yoga	
have	been	clearly	discussed,	and
a	glimpse	of	
bhakti-yoga	
has	also	been	given,	as	the	contents	for	the	complete
text.
Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	Second	Chapter	of	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhagavad-gītā
	in	the	matter	of	its	Contents.Chapter-3
CHAPTER	THREE
Karma-yoga
TEXT	1
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
ᇬ य ा य स ी
	
च े ᇰ क म ᆼ ण ᇿ त े
	
म त ा
	
ब ु द ् ि ध ज ᆼ न ा द ᆼ न
	
।
त ि ᇰ क ं
	
क म ᆼ ि ण
	
घ ो र े
	
म ा ं
	
ि न य ो ज य ि स
	
क े श व
	
॥
१
॥
arjuna	uvāca
jyāyasī	cet	karmaṇas	te
matā	buddhir	janārdana
tat	kiṁ	karmaṇi	ghore	māṁniyojayasi	keśava
arjunaḥ—
Arjuna;
	uvāca—
said;	
jyāyasī
—speaking	very	highly;	
cet—
although;
	karmaṇaḥ—
than	fruitive	action;	
te—
your;	
matā—
opinion;	
buddhiḥ
—intelligence;	
janārdana
—O	Kṛṣṇa;	
tat—
therefore;	
kim
—why;
	karmaṇi—
in
action;	
ghore—
ghastly;	
mām—
me;	
niyojayasi—
engaging	me;	
keśava—
O
Kṛṣṇa.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	said:	O	Janārdana,	O	Keśava,	why	do	You	urge	me	to	engage	in
this	ghastly	warfare,	if	You	think	that	intelligence	is	better	than	fruitive
work?
PURPORT
The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	has	very	elaborately
described	the	constitution	of	the	soul	in	the	previous	chapter,	with	a	view	to
deliver	His	intimate	friend	Arjuna	from	the	ocean	of	material	grief.	And	the
path	of	realization	has	been	recommended:	
buddhi-yoga,	
or	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	Sometimes	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	misunderstood	to	be	inertia,
and	one	with	such	a	misunderstanding	often	withdraws	to	a	secluded	place	to
become	fully	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	by	chanting	the	holy	name	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.	But
without	being	trained	in	the	philosophy	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	it	is	not
advisable	to	chant	the	holy	name	of	Kṛṣṇa	in	a	secluded	place	where	one	may
acquire	only	cheap	adoration	from	the	innocent	public.	Arjuna	also	thought	of
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	or	
buddhi	-yoga,	
or	intelligence	in	spiritual	advancement
of	knowledge,	as	something	like	retirement	from	active	life	and	the	practice	of
penance	and	austerity	at	a	secluded	place.	In	other	words,	he	wanted	to
skillfully	avoid	the	fighting	by	using	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	as	an	excuse.	But	as
a	sincere	student,	he	placed	the	matter	before	his	master	and	questioned	Kṛṣṇa
as	to	his	best	course	of	action.	In	answer,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	elaborately	explained
karma-yoga,	
or	work	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	in	this	Third	Chapter.
TEXT	2ᇼ य ा ि म श ् र े ण े व
	
व ा ᇧ य े न
	
ब ु द ् ि ध ं
	
म ो ह य स ी व
	
म े
	
।
त द े क ं
	
व द
	
ि न ि ᇽ च ᇰ य
	
य े न
	
श ् र े य ो ऽ ह म ा ᇴ न ु य ा म ्
	
॥
२
॥
vyāmiśreṇeva	vākyena
buddhiṁ	mohayasīva	me
tad	ekaṁ	vada	niścitya
yena	śreyo	'ham	āpnuyām
vyāmiśreṇa—
by	equivocal;	
iva—
as;	
vākyena—
words;	
buddhim
—
intelligence;	
mohayasi—
bewildering;	
iva—
as;	
me—
my;
	tat—
therefore;
ekam—
only	one;	
vada—
please	tell;	
niścitya—
ascertaining;	
yena—
by	which;
śreyaḥ
—real	benefit;	
aham—
I;
	āpnuyām—
may	have	it.
TRANSLATION
My	intelligence	is	bewildered	by	Your	equivocal	instructions.
Therefore,	please	tell	me	decisively	what	is	most	beneficial	for	me.
PURPORT
In	the	previous	chapter,	as	a	prelude	to	the	
Bhagavad-	gītā,	
many	different
paths	were	explained,	such	as	
sāṅkhya-yoga,	buddhi-yoga,	
control	of	the
senses	by	intelligence,	work	without	fruitive	desire,	and	the	position	of	the
neophyte.	This	was	all	presented	unsystematically.	A	more	organized	outline
of	the	path	would	be	necessary	for	action	and	understanding.	Arjuna,
therefore,	wanted	to	clear	up	these	apparently	confusing	matters	so	that	any
common	man	could	accept	them	without	misinterpretation.	Although	Kṛṣṇa
had	no	intention	of	confusing	Arjuna	by	any	jugglery	of	words,	Arjuna	could
not	follow	the	process	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness
—
either	by	inertia	or	active
service.	In	other	words,	by	his	questions	he	is	clearing	the	path	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	for	all	students	who	seriously	want	to	understand	the	mystery
of	the	
Bhagavad-gītā.
TEXT	3
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।ल ो क े ऽ ि ᇿ म ᇳ द ् ि व ि व ध ा
	
ि न ᇾ ठ ा
	
प ु र ा
	
प ् र ो ᇧ त ा
	
म य ा न घ
	
।
ᇥ ा न य ो ग े न
	
स ा ङ ् ᇨ य ा न ा ं
	
क म ᆼ य ो ग े न
	
य ो ि ग न ा म ्
	
॥
३
॥
śrī-bhagavān	uvāca
loke	'smin	dvi-vidhā	niṣṭhā
purā	proktā	mayānagha
jñāna-yogena	sāṅkhyānāṁ
karma-yogena	yoginām
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
loke—
in
the	world;	
asmin—
this;	
dvi-vidhā—
two	kinds	of;	
niṣṭhā—
faith;	
purā—
formerly;	
proktā—
was	said;	
mayā—
by	Me;	
anagha
—O	sinless	one;	
jñāna-
yogena—
by	the	linking	process	of	knowledge;	
sāṅkhyānām—
of	the	empiric
philosophers;	
karma-yogena—
by	the	linking	process	of	devotion;	
yoginām
—
of	the	devotees.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	O	sinless	Arjuna,	I	have	already	explained	that
there	are	two	classes	of	men	who	realize	the	Self.	Some	are	inclined	to
understand	Him	by	empirical,	philosophical	speculation,	and	others	are
inclined	to	know	Him	by	devotional	work.
PURPORT
In	the	Second	Chapter,	verse	39,	the	Lord	explained	two	kinds	of
procedures–namely	
sāṅkhya-yoga	
and	
karma-yoga,	
or	
buddhi-yoga.	
In	this
verse,	the	Lord	explains	the	same	more	clearly.	
Sāṅkhya-yoga,	
or	the
analytical	study	of	the	nature	of	spirit	and	matter,	is	the	subject	matter	for
persons	who	are	inclined	to	speculate	and	understand	things	by	experimental
knowledge	and	philosophy.	The	other	class	of	men	work	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	as	it	is	explained	in	the	61st	verse	of	the	Second	Chapter.	The
Lord	has	explained,	also	in	the	39th	verse,	that	by	working	by	the	principles	of
buddhi-yoga,	
or	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	one	can	be	relieved	from	the	bonds	of
action;	and,	furthermore,	there	is	no	flaw	in	the	process.	The	same	principle	is
more	clearly	explained	in	the	61st	verse–that	this	
buddhi-	yoga
	is	to	depend
entirely	on	the	Supreme	(or	more	specifically,	on	Kṛṣṇa),	and	in	this	way	allthe	senses	can	be	brought	under	control	very	easily.	Therefore,	both	the	
yogas
are	interdependant,	as	religion	and	philosophy.	Religion	without	philosophy	is
sentiment,	or	sometimes	fanaticism,	while	philosophy	without	religion	is
mental	speculation.	The	ultimate	goal	is	Kṛṣṇa,	because	the	philosophers	who
are	also	sincerely	searching	after	the	Absolute	Truth	come	in	the	end	to	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	This	is	also	stated	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
The	whole	process	is
to	understand	the	real	position	of	the	self	in	relation	to	the	Superself.	The
indirect	process	is	philosophical	speculation,	by	which,	gradually,	one	may
come	to	the	point	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness;	and	the	other	process	is	directly
connecting	with	everything	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Of	these	two,	the	path	of
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	better	because	it	does	not	depend	on	purifying	the
senses	by	a	philosophical	process.	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	itself	the	purifying
process,	and	by	the	direct	method	of	devotional	service	it	is	simultaneously
easy	and	sublime.
TEXT	4
न
	
क म ᆼ ण ा म न ा र ᇸ भ ा ᇳ न ै ᇾ क ᇸ य ᆾ
	
प ु ኄ ष ो ऽ ᇽ न ु त े
	
।
न
	
च
	
स ं ᇳ य स न ा द े व
	
ि स द ् ि ध ं
	
स म ि ध ग ᇫ छ ि त
	
॥
४
॥
na	karmaṇām	anārambhān
naiṣkarmyaṁ	puruṣo	'śnute
na	ca	sannyasanād	eva
siddhiṁ	samadhigacchati
na—
without;	
karmaṇām—
of	the	prescribed	duties;	
anārambhāt—
non-
performance;	
naiṣkarmyam—
freedom	from	reaction;	
puruṣah—
man;	
aśnute
—
achieve;	
na—
nor;	
ca—
also;	
sannyasanāt—
by	renunciation;	
eva—
simply;
siddhim—
success;	
samadhigacchati—
attain.
TRANSLATION
Not	by	merely	abstaining	from	work	can	one	achieve	freedom	from
reaction,	nor	by	renunciation	alone	can	one	attain	perfection.
PURPORTThe	renounced	order	of	life	can	be	accepted	upon	being	purified	by	the
discharge	of	the	prescribed	form	of	duties	which	are	laid	down	just	to	purify
the	heart	of	materialistic	men.	Without	purification,	one	cannot	attain	success
by	abruptly	adopting	the	fourth	order	of	life	(
sannyāsa
).	According	to	the
empirical	philosophers,	simply	by	adopting	
sannyāsa,	
or	retiring	from	fruitive
activities,	one	at	once	becomes	as	good	as	Nārāyaṇa.	But	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	does	not
approve	this	principle.	Without	purification	of	heart,	
sannyāsa	
is	simply	a
disturbance	to	the	social	order.	On	the	other	hand,	if	someone	takes	to	the
transcendental	service	of	the	Lord,	even	without	discharging	his	prescribed
duties,	whatever	he	may	be	able	to	advance	in	the	cause	is	accepted	by	the
Lord	
(buddhi-yoga).	Svalpam	apy	asya	dharmasya	trāyate	mahato	bhayāt.
Even	a	slight	performance	of	such	a	principle	enables	one	to	overcome	great
difficulties.
TEXT	5
न
	
ि ह
	
क ि ᇽ च ᇰ ᇤ ण म ि प
	
ज ा त ु
	
ि त ᇾ ठ ᇰ य क म ᆼ क ृ त ्
	
।
क ा य ᆼ त े
	
ቋ व श ः
	
क म ᆼ
	
स व ᆼ ः
	
प ् र क ृ ि त ज ै ग ु ᆼ ण ै ः
	
॥
५
॥
na	hi	kaścit	kṣaṇam	api
jātu	tiṣṭhaty	akarmakṛt
kāryate	hy	avaśaḥ	karma
sarvaḥ	prakṛti-jair	guṇaiḥ
na
—nor;	
hi
—certainly;	
kaścit
—anyone;	
kṣaṇam
—even	a	moment;	
api
—
also;	
jātu
—even;	
tiṣṭhati
—stands;	
akarma-kṛt
—without	doing	something;
kāryate
—forced	to	work;	
hi
—certainly;	
avaśaḥ
—helplessly;	
karma
—work;
sarvaḥ
—everything;	
prakṛti-jaiḥ
—out	of	the	modes	of	material	nature;
guṇaiḥ
—by	the	qualities.
TRANSLATION
All	men	are	forced	to	act	helplessly	according	to	the	impulses	born	of
the	modes	of	material	nature;	therefore	no	one	can	refrain	from	doing
something,	not	even	for	a	moment.PURPORT
It	is	not	a	question	of	embodied	life,	but	it	is	the	nature	of	the	soul	to	be
always	active.	Without	the	presence	of	the	spirit	soul,	the	material	body
cannot	move.	The	body	is	only	a	dead	vehicle	to	be	worked	by	the	spirit	soul,
which	is	always	active	and	cannot	stop	even	for	a	moment.	As	such,	the	spirit
soul	has	to	be	engaged	in	the	good	work	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	otherwise	it
will	be	engaged	in	occupations	dictated	by	illusory	energy.	In	contact	with
material	energy,	the	spirit	soul	acquires	material	modes,	and	to	purify	the	soul
from	such	affinities	it	is	necessary	to	engage	in	the	prescribed	duties	enjoined
in	the	
śāstras.	
But	if	the	soul	is	engaged	in	his	natural	function	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	whatever	he	is	able	to	do	is	good	for	him.	The	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam	
affirms	this:
tyaktvā	sva-dharmaṁ	caraṇāmbujaṁ	harer
bhajann	apakvo	'tha	patet	tato	yadi
yatra	kva	vābhadram	abhūd	amuṣya	kiṁ
ko	vārtha	āpto	'bhajatāṁ	sva-dharmataḥ.
"If	someone	takes	to	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	even	though	he	may	not	follow	the
prescribed	duties	in	the	
śāstras	
nor	execute	the	devotional	service	properly,
and	even	though	he	may	fall	down	from	the	standard,	there	is	no	loss	or	evil
for	him.	But	if	he	carries	out	all	the	injunctions	for	purification	in	the	
śāstras,
what	does	it	avail	him	if	he	is	not	Kṛṣṇa	conscious?"	
(Bhāg.	
1.5.17)	So	the
purificatory	process	is	necessary	for	reaching	this	point	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	Therefore,	
sannyāsa,	
or	any	purificatory	process,	is	to	help
reach	the	ultimate	goal	of	becoming	Kṛṣṇa	conscious,	without	which
everything	is	considered	a	failure.
TEXT	6
क म ᆹ ि ᇳ द ् र य ा ि ण
	
स ं य ᇸ य
	
य
	
आ ᇿ त े
	
म न स ा
	
ᇿ म र न ्
	
।
इ ि ᇳ द ् र य ा थ ा ᆼ ि ᇳ व म ू ढ ा ᇰ म ा
	
ि म ᇱ य ा च ा र ः
	
स
	
उ ᇫ य त े
	
॥
६
॥
karmendriyāṇi	saṁyamya
ya	āste	manasā	smaranindriyārthān	vimūḍhātmā
mithyācāraḥ	sa	ucyate
karma-indriyāṇi—
the	five	working	sense	organs;	
saṁyamya—
controlling;
yaḥ—
anyone	who;	
āste—
remains;	
manasā—
by	mind;	
smaran—
thinking;
indriya-arthān—
sense	objects;	
vimūḍha—
foolish;	
ātmā—
soul;	
mithyā-ācāraḥ
—
pretender;	
saḥ—
he;	
ucyate—
is	called.
TRANSLATION
One	who	restrains	the	senses	and	organs	of	action,	but	whose	mind
dwells	on	sense	objects,	certainly	deludes	himself	and	is	called	a
pretender.
PURPORT
There	are	many	pretenders	who	refuse	to	work	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	but
make	a	show	of	meditation,	while	actually	dwelling	within	the	mind	upon
sense	enjoyment.	Such	pretenders	may	also	speak	on	dry	philosophy	in	order
to	bluff	sophisticated	followers,	but	according	to	this	verse	these	are	the
greatest	cheaters.	For	sense	enjoyment	one	can	act	in	any	capacity	of	the
social	order,	but	if	one	follows	the	rules	and	regulations	of	his	particular
status,	he	can	make	gradual	progress	in	purifying	his	existence.	But	he	who
makes	a	show	of	being	a	
yogī
,	while	actually	searching	for	the	objects	of	sense
gratification,	must	be	called	the	greatest	cheater,	even	though	he	sometimes
speaks	of	philosophy.	His	knowledge	has	no	value	because	the	effects	of	such
a	sinful	man's	knowledge	are	taken	away	by	the	illusory	energy	of	the	Lord.
Such	a	pretender's	mind	is	always	impure,	and	therefore	his	show	of	yogic
meditation	has	no	value	whatsoever.
TEXT	7
य ि ᇿ ᇰ व ि ᇳ द ् र य ा ि ण
	
म न स ा
	
ि न य ᇸ य ा र भ त े ऽ ज ु ᆼ न
	
।
क म ᆹ ि ᇳ द ् र य ै ः
	
क म ᆼ य ो ग म स ᇧ त ः
	
स
	
ि व ि श ᇾ य त े
	
॥
७
॥
yas	tv	indriyāṇi	manasāniyamyārabhate	'rjuna
karmendriyaiḥ	karma-yogam
asaktaḥ	sa	viśiṣyate
yaḥ—
one	who;	
tu—
but;	
indriyāṇi—
senses;	
manasā—
by	the	mind;	
niyamya
—
regulating;	
ārabhate—
begins;	
arjuna
—O	Arjuna;	
karma-indriyaiḥ—
by	the
active	sense	organs;	
karma-yogam—
devotion;	
asaktaḥ—
without	attachment;
saḥ—
he;	
viśiṣyate—
by	far	the	better.
TRANSLATION
On	the	other	hand,	he	who	controls	the	senses	by	the	mind	and	engages
his	active	organs	in	works	of	devotion,	without	attachment,	is	by	far
superior.
PURPORT
Instead	of	becoming	a	pseudo-transcendentalist	for	the	sake	of	wanton
living	and	sense	enjoyment,	it	is	far	better	to	remain	in	one's	own	business	and
execute	the	purpose	of	life,	which	is	to	get	free	from	material	bondage	and
enter	into	the	kingdom	of	God.	The	prime	
svārtha-gati
,	or	goal	of	self-interest,
is	to	reach	Viṣṇu.	The	whole	institution	of	
varṇa
	and	
āśrama
	is	designed	to
help	us	reach	this	goal	of	life.	A	householder	can	also	reach	this	destination	by
regulated	service	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	For	self-	realization,	one	can	live	a
controlled	life,	as	prescribed	in	the	
śāstras
,	and	continue	carrying	out	his
business	without	attachment,	and	in	that	way	make	progress.	Such	a	sincere
person	who	follows	this	method	is	far	better	situated	than	the	false	pretender
who	adopts	show-bottle	spiritualism	to	cheat	the	innocent	public.	A	sincere
sweeper	in	the	street	is	far	better	than	the	charlatan	meditator	who	meditates
only	for	the	sake	of	making	a	living.
TEXT	8
ि न य त ं
	
क ु ኄ
	
क म ᆼ
	
ᇰ व ं
	
क म ᆼ
	
ᇬ य ा य ो
	
ቋ क म ᆼ ण ः
	
।
श र ी र य ा त ् र ा ि प
	
च
	
त े
	
न
	
प ् र ि स ሬ ᆸ ेद क म ᆼ ण ः
	
॥
८
॥niyataṁ	kuru	karma	tvaṁ
karma	jyāyo	hy	akarmaṇaḥ
śarīra-yātrāpi	ca	te
na	prasiddhyed	akarmaṇaḥ
niyatam—
prescribed;	
kuru—
do;	
karma—
duties;	
tvam—
you;
	karma—
work;
jyāyaḥ—
better;	
hi—
than;	
akarmaṇaḥ—
without	work;	
śarīra—
bodily;	
yātrā—
maintenance;	
api—
even;	
ca—
also;	
te—
your;	
na—
never;	
prasiddhyet—
effected;	
akarmaṇaḥ—
without	work.
TRANSLATION
Perform	your	prescribed	duty,	for	action	is	better	than	inaction.	A	man
cannot	even	maintain	his	physical	body	without	work.
PURPORT
There	are	many	pseudo-meditators	who	misrepresent	themselves	as
belonging	to	high	parentage,	and	great	professional	men	who	falsely	pose	that
they	have	sacrificed	everything	for	the	sake	of	advancement	in	spiritual	life.
Lord	Kṛṣṇa	did	not	want	Arjuna	to	become	a	pretender,	but	that	he	perform	his
prescribed	duties	as	set	forth	for	
kṣatriyas
.	Arjuna	was	a	householder	and	a
military	general,	and	therefore	it	was	better	for	him	to	remain	as	such	and
perform	his	religious	duties	as	prescribed	for	the	householder	
kṣatriya
.	Such
activities	gradually	cleanse	the	heart	of	a	mundane	man	and	free	him	from
material	contamination.	So-called	renunciation	for	the	purpose	of	maintenance
is	never	approved	by	the	Lord,	nor	by	any	religious	scripture.	After	all,	one
has	to	maintain	one's	body	and	soul	together	by	some	work.	Work	should	not
be	given	up	capriciously,	without	purification	of	materialistic	propensities.
Anyone	who	is	in	the	material	world	is	certainly	possessed	of	the	impure
propensity	for	lording	it	over	material	nature,	or,	in	other	words,	for	sense
gratification.	Such	polluted	propensities	have	to	be	cleared.	Without	doing	so,
through	prescribed	duties,	one	should	never	attempt	to	become	a	so-called
transcendentalist,	renouncing	work	and	living	at	the	cost	of	others.
TEXT	9य ᇥ ा थ ा ᆼ ᇰ क म ᆼ ण ो ऽ ᇳ य त ् र
	
ल ो क ो ऽ य ं
	
क म ᆼ ब ᇳ ध न ः
	
।
त द थ ᆾ
	
क म ᆼ
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
म ु ᇧ त स ङ ् ग ः
	
स म ा च र
	
॥
९
॥
yajñārthāt	karmaṇo	'nyatra
loko	'yaṁ	karma-bandhanaḥ
tad-arthaṁ	karma	kaunteya
mukta-saṅgaḥ	samācara
yajña-arthāt—
only	for	the	sake	of	Yajña,	or	Viṣṇu;	
karmaṇaḥ—
work	done;
anyatra—
otherwise;	
lokaḥ—
this	world;	
ayam—
this;	
karma-bandhanaḥ	
—
bondage	by	work;	
tat—
Him;	
artham—
for	the	sake	of;	
karma—
work;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of	Kuntī;	
mukta-saṅgaḥ—
liberated	from	association;	
samācara—
do
it	perfectly.
TRANSLATION
Work	done	as	a	sacrifice	for	Viṣṇu	has	to	be	performed,	otherwise
work	binds	one	to	this	material	world.	Therefore,	O	son	of	Kuntī,
perform	your	prescribed	duties	for	His	satisfaction,	and	in	that	way	you
will	always	remain	unattached	and	free	from	bondage.
PURPORT
Since	one	has	to	work	even	for	the	simple	maintenance	of	the	body,	the
prescribed	duties	for	a	particular	social	position	and	quality	are	so	made	that
that	purpose	can	be	fulfilled.	
Yajña	
means	Lord	Viṣṇu,	or	sacrificial
performances.	All	sacrificial	performances	also	are	meant	for	the	satisfaction
of	Lord	Viṣṇu.	The	
Vedas	
enjoin:	
yajño	vai	viṣṇuḥ.	
In	other	words,	the	same
purpose	is	served	whether	one	performs	prescribed	
yajñas	
or	directly	serves
Lord	Viṣṇu.	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	therefore	performance	of	
yajña	
as	it	is
prescribed	in	this	verse.	The	
varṇāśrama	
institution	also	aims	at	this	for
satisfying	Lord	Viṣṇu.	
"Varṇāśramācāra-vatā	puruṣeṇa	paraḥ	pumān/viṣṇur
ārādhyate
..."	(
Viṣṇu	Purāṇa
	3.8.8)	Therefore	one	has	to	work	for	the
satisfaction	of	Viṣṇu.	Any	other	work	done	in	this	material	world	wilI	be	a
cause	of	bondage,	for	both	good	and	evil	work	have	their	reactions,	and	any
reaction	binds	the	performer.	Therefore,	one	has	to	work	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	to	satisfy	Kṛṣṇa	(or	Viṣṇu);	and	while	performing	suchactivities	one	is	in	a	liberated	stage.	This	is	the	great	art	of	doing	work,	and	in
the	beginning	this	process	requires	very	expert	guidance.	One	should	therefore
act	very	diligently,	under	the	expert	guidance	of	a	devotee	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	or
under	the	direct	instruction	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	Himself	(under	whom	Arjuna	had
the	opportunity	to	work).	Nothing	should	be	performed	for	sense	gratification,
but	everything	should	be	done	for	the	satisfaction	of	Kṛṣṇa.	This	practice	will
not	only	save	one	from	the	reaction	of	work,	but	will	also	gradually	elevate
one	to	transcendental	loving	service	of	the	Lord,	which	alone	can	raise	one	to
the	kingdom	of	God.
TEXT	10
स ह य ᇥ ा ः
	
प ् र ज ा ः
	
स ृ ᇾ ट ् व ा
	
प ु र ो व ा च
	
प ् र ज ा प ि त ः
	
।
अ न े न
	
प ् र स ि व ᇾ य ᇲ व म े ष
	
व ो ऽ ि ᇿ ᇰ व ᇾ ट क ा म ध ु क ्
	
॥
१ ०
॥
saha-yajñāḥ	prajāḥ	sṛṣṭvā
purovāca	prajāpatiḥ
anena	prasaviṣyadhvam
eṣa	vo	'stv	iṣṭa-kāma-dhuk
saha—
along	with;	
yajñāḥ—
sacrifices;	
prajāḥ—
generations;	
sṛṣṭvā—
by
creating;	
purā—
anciently;	
uvāca—
said;	
prajā-patiḥ—
the	Lord	of	creatures;
anena—
by	this;	
prasaviṣyadhvam—
be	more	and	more	prosperous;	
eṣaḥ—
certainly;	
vaḥ—
your;	
astu—
let	it	be;	
iṣṭa—
all	desirable;	
kāma-dhuk—
bestower.
TRANSLATION
In	the	beginning	of	creation,	the	Lord	of	all	creatures	sent	forth
generations	of	men	and	demigods,	along	with	sacrifices	for	Viṣṇu,	and
blessed	them	by	saying,	"Be	thou	happy	by	this	yajña	[sacrifice]	because
its	performance	will	bestow	upon	you	all	desirable	things."
PURPORT
The	material	creation	by	the	Lord	of	creatures	(Viṣṇu)	is	a	chance	offered	tothe	conditioned	souls	to	come	back	home-back	to	Godhead.	All	living	entities
within	the	material	creation	are	conditioned	by	material	nature	because	of
their	forgetfulness	of	their	relationship	to	Kṛṣṇa,	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.	The	Vedic	principles	are	to	help	us	understand	this	eternal	relation
as	it	is	stated	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā:	vedaiś	ca	sarvair	aham	eva	vedyaḥ
.	The
Lord	says	that	the	purpose	of	the	
Vedas
	is	to	understand	Him.	In	the	Vedic
hymns	it	is	said:	
patiṁ	viśvasyātmeśvaram.
	Therefore,	the	Lord	of	the	living
entities	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Viṣṇu.	In	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam	
also	Śrīla	Śukadeva	Gosvāmī	describes	the	Lord	as	
pati
	in	so
many	ways:
śriyaḥ-patir	yajña-patiḥ	prajā-patir
dhiyāṁ	patir	loka-patir	dharā-patiḥ
patir	gatiś	cāndhaka-vṛṣṇi-sātvatāṁ
prasīdatāṁ	me	bhagavān	satāṁ	patiḥ
(Bhāg.	2.4.20)
The	
prajā-pati
	is	Lord	Viṣṇu,	and	He	is	the	Lord	of	all	living	creatures,	all
worlds,	and	all	beauties,	and	the	protector	of	everyone.	The	Lord	created	this
material	world	for	the	conditioned	souls	to	learn	how	to	perform	
yajñas
(sacrifice)	for	the	satisfaction	of	Viṣṇu,	so	that	while	in	the	material	world
they	can	live	very	comfortably	without	anxiety.	Then	after	finishing	the
present	material	body,	they	can	enter	into	the	kingdom	of	God.	That	is	the
whole	program	for	the	conditioned	soul.	By	performance	of	
yajña,	
the
conditioned	souls	gradually	become	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	and	become	godly	in	all
respects.	In	this	age	of	Kali,	the	
saṅkīrtana-yajña	
(the	chanting	of	the	names
of	God)	is	recommended	by	the	Vedic	scriptures,	and	this	transcendental
system	was	introduced	by	Lord	Caitanya	for	the	deliverance	of	all	men	in	this
age.	
Saṅkīrtana-yajña	
and	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	go	well	together.	Lord	Kṛṣṇa
in	His	devotional	form	(as	Lord	Caitanya)	is	mentioned	in	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam	
as	follows,	with	special	reference	to	the	
saṅkīrtana-yajña:
kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ	tviṣākṛṣṇāṁ	sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam
yajñaiḥ	saṅkīrtana-prāyair	yajanti	hi	su-medhasaḥ
"In	this	age	of	Kali,	people	who	are	endowed	with	sufficient	intelligence	will
worship	the	Lord,	who	is	accompanied	by	His	associates,	by	performance	of
saṅkīrtana-yajña."	(Bhāg.	
11.5.29)	Other	
yajñas
	prescribed	in	the	Vedic
literatures	are	not	easy	to	perform	in	this	age	of	Kali,	but	the	
saṅkīrtana-yajñaiseasy	and	sublime	for	all	purposes.
TEXT	11
द े व ा ᇳ भ ा व य त ा न े न
	
त े
	
द े व ा
	
भ ा व य ᇳ त ु
	
व ः
	
।
प र ᇿ प र ं
	
भ ा व य ᇳ त ः
	
श ् र े य ः
	
प र म व ा ᇴ ᇿ य थ
	
॥
१ १
॥
devān	bhāvayatānena
te	devā	bhāvayantu	vaḥ
parasparaṁ	bhāvayantaḥ
śreyaḥ	param	avāpsyatha
devān—
demigods;	
bhāvayata—
having	been	pleased;	
anena—
by	this
sacrifice;	
te—
those;	
devāḥ—
the	demigods;	
bhāvayantu—
will	please;	
vaḥ
—
you;	
parasparam—
mutual;	
bhāvayantaḥ—
pleasing	one	another;	
sreyaḥ
—
benediction;	
param—
the	supreme;	
avāpsyatha—
do	you	achieve.
TRANSLATION
The	demigods,	being	pleased	by	sacrifices,	will	also	please	you;	thus
nourishing	one	another,	there	will	reign	general	prosperity	for	all.
PURPORT
The	demigods	are	empowered	administrators	of	material	affairs.	The	supply
of	air,	light,	water	and	all	other	benedictions	for	maintaining	the	body	and	soul
of	every	living	entity	are	entrusted	to	the	demigods,	who	are	innumerable
assistants	in	different	parts	of	the	body	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.	Their	pleasures	and	displeasures	are	dependant	on	the	performance
of	
yajñas
	by	the	human	being.	Some	of	the	
yajñas	
are	meant	to	satisfy
particular	demigods;	but	even	in	so	doing,	Lord	Viṣṇu	is	worshiped	in	all
yajñas	
as	the	chief	beneficiary.	It	is	stated	also	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
that
Kṛṣṇa	Himself	is	the	beneficiary	of	all	kinds	of	
yajñas:	bhoktāraṁ	yajña-
tapasām.	
Therefore,	ultimate	satisfaction	of	the	
yajñapati
	is	the	chief	purpose
of	all	
yajñas.	
When	these	
yajñas	
are	perfectly	performed,	naturally	the
demigods	in	charge	of	the	different	departments	of	supply	are	pleased,	andthere	is	no	scarcity	in	the	supply	of	natural	products.
Performance	of	
yajñas	
has	many	side	benefits,	ultimately	leading	to
liberation	from	the	material	bondage.	By	performance	of	
yajñas,	
all	activities
become	purified,	as	it	is	stated	in	the	
Vedas:
āhāra-śuddhau	sattva-śuddhiḥ	sattva-śuddhau
dhruvā	smṛtiḥ	smṛti-lambhe	sarva-granthīnāṁ	vipra-mokṣaḥ
As	it	will	be	explained	in	the	following	verse,	by	performance	of	
yajña,	
one's
eatables	become	sanctified,	and	by	eating	sanctified	foodstuffs,	one's	very
existence	becomes	purified;	by	the	purification	of	existence,	finer	tissues	in
the	memory	become	sanctified,	and	when	memory	is	sanctified,	one	can	think
of	the	path	of	liberation,	and	all	these	combined	together	lead	to	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	the	great	necessity	of	present-day	society.
TEXT	12
इ ᇾ ट ा ᇳ भ ो ग ा ि ᇳ ह
	
व ो
	
द े व ा
	
द ा ᇿ य ᇳ त े
	
य ᇥ भ ा ि व त ा ः
	
।
त ै द ᆼ ሧ ा न प ् र द ा य ै ᇷ य ो
	
य ो
	
भ ु ङ ् ᇧ त े
	
ᇿ त े न
	
ए व
	
स ः
	
॥
१ २
॥
iṣṭān	bhogān	hi	vo	devā
dāsyante	yajña-bhāvitāḥ
tair	dattān	apradāyaibhyo
yo	bhuṅkte	stena	eva	saḥ
iṣṭān—
desired;	
bhogān—
necessities	of	life;	
hi—
certainly;	
vaḥ—
unto	you;
devāḥ—
the	demigods;	
dāsyante—
award;	
yajña-bhāvitāḥ—
being	satisfied	by
the	performance	of	sacrifices;	
taiḥ—
by	them;	
dattān—
things	given;	
apradāya
—without	offering;	
ebhyaḥ—
to	the	demigods;	
yaḥ—
he	who;	
bhuṅkte—
enjoys;
stenaḥ—
thief;	
eva—
certainly;	
saḥ—
is	he.
TRANSLATION
In	charge	of	the	various	necessities	of	life,	the	demigods,	being	satisfied
by	the	performance	of	yajña	[sacrifice],	supply	all	necessities	to	man.	But
he	who	enjoys	these	gifts,	without	offering	them	to	the	demigods	in
return,	is	certainly	a	thief.PURPORT
The	demigods	are	authorized	supplying	agents	on	behalf	of	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	Viṣṇu.	Therefore,	they	must	be	satisfied	by	the
performance	of	prescribed	
yajñas.	
In	the	
Vedas,	
there	are	different	kinds	of
yajñas	
prescribed	for	different	kinds	of	demigods,	but	all	are	ultimately
offered	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	For	one	who	cannot
understand	what	the	Personality	of	Godhead	is,	sacrifice	to	the	demigods	is
recommended.	According	to	the	different	material	qualities	of	the	persons
concerned,	different	types	of	
yajñas	
are	recommended	in	the	
Vedas.	
Worship
of	different	demigods	is	also	on	the	same	basis
—
namely,	according	to
different	qualities.	For	example,	the	meat-eaters	are	recommended	to	worship
the	goddess	Kālī,	the	ghastly	form	of	material	nature,	and	before	the	goddess
the	sacrifice	of	animals	is	recommended.	But	for	those	who	are	in	the	mode	of
goodness,	the	transcendental	worship	of	Viṣṇu	is	recommended.	But
ultimately,	all	
yajñas	
are	meant	for	gradual	promotion	to	the	transcendental
position.	For	ordinary	men,	at	least	five	
yajñas,	
known	as	
pañca-mahāyajña,
are	necessary.
One	should	know,	however,	that	all	the	necessities	of	life	that	the	human
society	requires	are	supplied	by	the	demigod	agents	of	the	Lord.	No	one	can
manufacture	anything.	Take,	for	example,	all	the	eatables	of	human	society.
These	eatables	include	grains,	fruits,	vegetables,	milk,	sugar,	etc.,	for	the
persons	in	the	mode	of	goodness,	and	also	eatables	for	the	nonvegetarians,
like	meats,	etc.,	none	of	which	can	be	manufactured	by	men.	Then	again,	take
for	example	heat,	light,	water,	air,	etc.,	which	are	also	necessities	of	life–none
of	them	can	be	manufactured	by	the	human	society.	Without	the	Supreme
Lord,	there	can	be	no	profuse	sunlight,	moonlight,	rainfall,	breeze,	etc.,
without	which	no	one	can	live.	Obviously,	our	life	is	dependant	on	supplies
from	the	Lord.	Even	for	our	manufacturing	enterprises,	we	require	so	many
raw	materials	like	metal,	sulphur,	mercury,	manganese,	and	so	many	essentials
—
all	of	which	are	supplied	by	the	agents	of	the	Lord,	with	the	purpose	that	we
should	make	proper	use	of	them	to	keep	ourselves	fit	and	healthy	for	the
purpose	of	self-realization,	leading	to	the	ultimate	goal	of	life,	namely,
liberation	from	the	material	struggle	for	existence.	This	aim	of	life	is	attained
by	performance	of	
yajñas.	
If	we	forget	the	purpose	of	human	life	and	simply
take	supplies	from	the	agents	of	the	Lord	for	sense	gratification	and	become
more	and	more	entangled	in	material	existence,	which	is	not	the	purpose	ofcreation,	certainly	we	become	thieves,	and	therefore	we	are	punished	by	the
laws	of	material	nature.	A	society	of	thieves	can	never	be	happy	because	they
have	no	aim	in	life.	The	gross	materialist	thieves	have	no	ultimate	goal	of	life.
They	are	simply	directed	to	sense	gratification;	nor	do	they	have	knowledge	of
how	to	perform	
yajñas
.	Lord	Caitanya,	however,	inaugurated	the	easiest
performance	of	
yajña
,	namely	the	
saṅkīrtana-yajña
,	which	can	be	performed
by	anyone	in	the	world	who	accepts	the	principles	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
TEXT	13
य ᇥ ि श ᇾ ट ा ि श न ः
	
स ᇳ त ो
	
म ु ᇫ य ᇳ त े
	
स व ᆼ ि क ि ᇺ ब ष ै ः
	
।
भ ु ᇮ ज त े
	
त े
	
ᇰ व घ ं
	
प ा प ा
	
य े
	
प च ᇳ ᇰ य ा ᇰ म क ा र ण ा त ्
	
॥
१ ३
॥
yajña-śiṣṭāśinaḥ	santo
mucyante	sarva-kilbiṣaiḥ
bhuñjate	te	tv	agham	pāpā
ye	pacanty	ātma-kāraṇāt
yajña-śiṣṭa—
food	taken	after	performance	of	
yajña
;	
aśinaḥ—
eaters;	
santaḥ
—
the	devotees;	
mucyante—
get	relief	from;	
sarva—
all	kinds	of;	
kilbiṣaiḥ
—
sins;	
bhuñjate—
enjoy;	
te—
they;	
tu—
but;	
agham—
grievous	sins;	
pāpāḥ
—
sinners;	
ye—
those;	
pacanti—
prepare	food;	
ātma-kāraṇāt—
for	sense
enjoyment.
TRANSLATION
The	devotees	of	the	Lord	are	released	from	all	kinds	of	sins	because
they	eat	food	which	is	offered	first	for	sacrifice.	Others,	who	prepare	food
for	personal	sense	enjoyment,	verily	eat	only	sin.
PURPORT
The	devotees	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	or	the	persons	who	are	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	are	called	
santas
,	and	they	are	always	in	love	with	the	Lord	as
it	is	described	in	the	
Brahma-saṁhitā:	premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-
vilocanena	santaḥ	sadaiva	hṛdayeṣu	vilokayanti.
	The	
santas
,	being	always	ina	compact	of	love	with	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Govinda	(the
giver	of	all	pleasures),	or	Mukunda	(the	giver	of	liberation),	or	Kṛṣṇa	(the	all-
attractive	person),	cannot	accept	anything	without	first	offering	it	to	the
Supreme	Person.	Therefore,	such	devotees	always	perform	
yajñas
	in	different
modes	of	devotional	service,	such	as	
śravaṇam,	kīrtanam,	smaraṇam,
arcanam
,	etc.,	and	these	performances	of	
yajñas
	keep	them	always	aloof	from
all	kinds	of	contamination	of	sinful	association	in	the	material	world.	Others,
who	prepare	food	for	self	or	sense	gratification,	are	not	only	thieves,	but	are
also	the	eaters	of	all	kinds	of	sins.	How	can	a	person	be	happy	if	he	is	both	a
thief	and	sinful?	It	is	not	possible.	Therefore,	in	order	for	people	to	become
happy	in	all	respects,	they	must	be	taught	to	perform	the	easy	process	of
saṅkīrtana-yajña
,	in	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Otherwise,	there	can	be	no
peace	or	happiness	in	the	world.
TEXT	14
अ ᇳ न ा द ् भ व ि ᇳ त
	
भ ू त ा ि न
	
प ज ᆼ ᇳ य ा द ᇳ न स ᇸ भ व ः
	
।
य ᇥ ा द ् भ व ि त
	
प ज ᆼ ᇳ य ो
	
य ᇥ ः
	
क म ᆼ स म ु द ् भ व ः
	
॥
१ ४
॥
annād	bhavanti	bhūtāni
parjanyād	anna-sambhavaḥ
yajñād	bhavati	parjanyo
yajñaḥ	karma-samudbhavaḥ
annāt—
from	grains;	
bhavanti—
grow;	
bhūtāni—
the	material	bodies;
parjanyāt—
from	rains;	
anna—
food	grains;	
sambhavaḥ—
are	made	possible;
yajñāt—
from	the	performance	of	sacrifice;	
bhavati—
becomes	possible;
parjanyaḥ—
rains;	
yajñaḥ—
performance	of	
yajña
;	
karma—
prescribed	duties;
samudbhavaḥ—
born	of.
TRANSLATION
All	living	bodies	subsist	on	food	grains,	which	are	produced	from	rain.
Rains	are	produced	by	performance	of	yajña	[sacrifice],	and	yajña	is
born	of	prescribed	duties.PURPORT
Śrīla	Baladeva	Vidyābhūṣaṇa,	a	great	commentator	on	the	
Bhagavad-	gītā
,
writes	as	follows:	
ye	indrādy-aṅga-tayāvasthitaṁ	yajñaṁ	sarveśvaraṁ	viṣṇum
abhyarccya	taccheṣam	aśnanti	tena	taddeha-yāntrāṁ	sampādayanti	te	santaḥ
sarveśvarasya	bhaktāḥ	sarva-kilviṣair	anādi-kāla-vivṛddhair	ātmānubhava-
pratibandhakair	nikhilaiḥ	pāpair	vimucyante
.	The	Supreme	Lord,	who	is
known	as	the	
yajña-puruṣaḥ
,	or	the	personal	beneficiary	of	all	sacrifices,	is
the	master	of	all	demigods	who	serve	Him	as	the	different	limbs	of	the	body
serve	the	whole.	Demigods	like	Indra,	Candra,	Varuṇa,	etc.,	are	appointed
officers	who	manage	material	affairs,	and	the	Vedas	direct	sacrifices	to	satisfy
these	demigods	so	that	they	may	be	pleased	to	supply	air,	light	and	water
sufficiently	to	produce	food	grains.	When	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	worshiped,	the
demigods,	who	are	different	limbs	of	the	Lord,	are	also	automatically
worshiped;	therefore	there	is	no	separate	need	to	worship	the	demigods.	For
this	reason,	the	devotees	of	the	Lord,	who	are	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	offer
food	to	Kṛṣṇa	and	then	eat–a	process	which	nourishes	the	body	spiritually.	By
such	action	not	only	are	past	sinful	reactions	in	the	body	vanquished,	but	the
body	becomes	immunized	to	all	contamination	of	material	nature.	When	there
is	an	epidemic	disease,	an	antiseptic	vaccine	protects	a	person	from	the	attack
of	such	an	epidemic.	Similarly,	food	offered	to	Lord	Viṣṇu	and	then	taken	by
us	makes	us	sufficiently	resistant	to	material	affection,	and	one	who	is
accustomed	to	this	practice	is	called	a	devotee	of	the	Lord.	Therefore,	a	person
in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	who	eats	only	food	offered	to	Kṛṣṇa,	can	counteract
all	reactions	of	past	material	infections,	which	are	impediments	to	the	progress
of	self-	realization.	On	the	other	hand,	one	who	does	not	do	so	continues	to
increase	the	volume	of	sinful	action,	and	this	prepares	the	next	body	to
resemble	hogs	and	dogs,	to	suffer	the	resultant	reactions	of	all	sins.	The
material	world	is	full	of	contaminations,	and	one	who	is	immunized	by
accepting	
prasādam
	of	the	Lord	(food	offered	to	Viṣṇu)	is	saved	from	the
attack,	whereas	one	who	does	not	do	so	becomes	subjected	to	contamination.
Food	grains	or	vegetables	are	factually	eatables.	The	human	being	eats
different	kinds	of	food	grains,	vegetables,	fruits,	etc.,	and	the	animals	eat	the
refuse	of	the	food	grains	and	vegetables,	grass,	plants,	etc.	Human	beings	who
are	accustomed	to	eating	meat	and	flesh	must	also	depend	on	the	production
of	vegetation	in	order	to	eat	the	animals.	Therefore,	ultimately,	we	have	to
depend	on	the	production	of	the	field	and	not	on	the	production	of	bigfactories.	The	field	production	is	due	to	sufficient	rain	from	the	sky,	and	such
rains	are	controlled	by	demigods	like	Indra,	sun,	moon,	etc.,	and	they	are	all
servants	of	the	Lord.	The	Lord	can	be	satisfied	by	sacrifices;	therefore,	one
who	cannot	perform	them	will	find	himself	in	scarcity–that	is	the	law	of
nature.	
Yajña,	
specifically	the	
saṅkīrtana-yajña	
prescribed	for	this	age,	must
therefore	be	performed	to	save	us	at	least	from	scarcity	of	food	supply.
TEXT	15
क म ᆼ
	
ब ् र ቊ ो द ् भ व ं
	
ि व द ् ि ध
	
ब ् र ቊ ा ᇤ र स म ु द ् भ व म ्
	
।
त ᇿ म ा ᇰ स व ᆼ ग त ं
	
ब ् र ቊ
	
ि न ᇰ य ं
	
य ᇥ े
	
प ् र ि त ि ᇾ ठ त म ्
	
॥
१ ५
॥
karma	brahmodbhavaṁ	viddhi
brahmākṣara-samudbhavam
tasmāt	sarva-gataṁ	brahma
nityaṁ	yajñe	pratiṣṭhitam
karma—
work;	
brahma-Vedas;	udbhavam—
produced	from;	
viddhi—
one
should	know;	
brahma—
the	
Vedas;	akṣara—
the	Supreme	Brahman
(Personality	of	Godhead);	
samudbhavam;	
directly	manifested;	
tasmāt
—
therefore;	
sarva-gatam—
all-pervading;	
brahma—
Transcendence;	
nityam
—
eternally;	
yajñe
—in	sacrifice;	
pratiṣṭhitam
—situated.
TRANSLATION
Regulated	activities	are	prescribed	in	the	Vedas,	and	the	Vedas	are
directly	manifested	from	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.
Consequently	the	all-pervading	Transcendence	is	eternally	situated	in
acts	of	sacrifice.
PURPORT
Yajñārtha	karma
,	or	the	necessity	of	work	for	the	satisfaction	of	Kṛṣṇa	only,
is	more	expressly	stated	in	this	verse.	If	we	have	to	work	for	the	satisfaction	of
the	
yajña-puruṣa
,	Viṣṇu,	then	we	must	find	out	the	direction	of	work	inBrahman,	or	the	transcendental	
Vedas.	
The	
Vedas	
are	therefore	codes	of
working	directions.	Anything	performed	without	the	direction	of	the	
Vedas	
is
called	
vikarma,	
or	unauthorized	or	sinful	work.	Therefore,	one	should	always
take	direction	from	the	
Vedas	
to	be	saved	from	the	reaction	of	work.	As	one
has	to	work	in	ordinary	life	by	the	direction	of	the	state,	similarly,	one	has	to
work	under	direction	of	the	supreme	state	of	the	Lord.	Such	directions	in	the
Vedas	
are	directly	manifested	from	the	breathing	of	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead.	It	is	said:	
asya	mahato	bhūtasya	naśvasitam	etad	yad	ṛg-vedo
yajur-vedaḥ	sāma-vedo	'tharvāṅ	girasaḥ.
	"The	four	
Vedas—
namely	the	
Ṛg-
veda,	Yajur-veda,	Sāma-veda	
and	
Atharva-veda—
are	all	emanations	from	the
breathing	of	the	great	Personality	of	Godhead."	The	Lord,	being	omnipotent,
can	speak	by	breathing	air,	as	it	is	confirmed	in	the	
Brahma-saṁhitā,	
for	the
Lord	has	the	omnipotence	to	perform	through	each	of	His	senses	the	actions	of
all	other	senses.	In	other	words,	the	Lord	can	speak	through	His	breathing,	and
He	can	impregnate	by	His	eyes.	In	fact,	it	is	said	that	He	glanced	over	material
nature	and	thus	fathered	all	living	entities.	After	creating	or	impregnating	the
conditioned	souls	into	the	womb	of	material	nature,	He	gave	His	directions	in
the	Vedic	wisdom	as	to	how	such	conditioned	souls	can	return	home,	back	to
Godhead.	We	should	always	remember	that	the	conditioned	souls	in	material
nature	are	all	eager	for	material	enjoyment.	But	the	Vedic	directions	are	so
made	that	one	can	satisfy	one's	perverted	desires,	then	return	to	Godhead,
having	finished	his	so-called	enjoyment.	It	is	a	chance	for	the	conditioned
souls	to	attain	liberation;	therefore	the	conditioned	souls	must	try	to	follow	the
process	of	
yajña	
by	becoming	Kṛṣṇa	conscious.	Even	those	who	cannot	follow
the	Vedic	injunctions	may	adopt	the	principles	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	and
that	will	take	the	place	of	performance	of	Vedic	
yajñas,	
or	
karmas.
TEXT	16
ए व ं
	
प ् र व ि त ᆼ त ं
	
च क ् र ं
	
न ा न ु व त ᆼ य त ी ह
	
य ः
	
।
अ घ ा य ु ि र ि ᇳ द ् र य ा र ा म ो
	
म ो घ ं
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
स
	
ज ी व ि त
	
॥
१ ६
॥
evaṁ	pravartitaṁ	cakraṁ
nānuvartayatīha	yaḥ
aghāyur	indriyārāmo
moghaṁ	pārtha	sa	jīvatievam—
thus	prescribed;	
pravartitam—
established	by	the	
Vedas;	cakram—
cycle;	
na—
does	not;	
anuvartayati—
adopt;	
iha—
in	this	life;	
yaḥ—
one	who;
aghāyuḥ—
life	full	of	sins;	
indriya-ārāmaḥ—
satisfied	in	sense	gratification;
mogham—
useless;	
pārtha
—O	son	of	Pṛthā	(Arjuna);	
saḥ—
one	who	does	so;
jīvati—
lives.
TRANSLATION
My	dear	Arjuna,	a	man	who	does	not	follow	this	prescribed	Vedic
system	of	sacrifice	certainly	leads	a	life	of	sin,	for	a	person	delighting	only
in	the	senses	lives	in	vain.
PURPORT
The	mammonist	philosophy	of	work	very	hard	and	enjoy	sense	gratification
is	condemned	herein	by	the	Lord.	Therefore,	for	those	who	want	to	enjoy	this
material	world,	the	above-mentioned	cycle	of	performing	
yajñas	
is	absolutely
necessary.	One	who	does	not	follow	such	regulations	is	living	a	very	risky	life,
being	condemned	more	and	more.	By	nature's	law,	this	human	form	of	life	is
specifically	meant	for	self-realization,	in	either	of	the	three	ways–namely
karma-yoga,	jñāna-yoga,	
or	
bhakti-yoga.	
There	is	no	necessity	of	rigidly
following	the	performances	of	the	prescribed	
yajñas	
for	the	transcendentalists
who	are	above	vice	and	virtue;	but	those	who	are	engaged	in	sense
gratification	require	purification	by	the	above-mentioned	cycle	of	
yajña
performances.	There	are	different	kinds	of	activities.	Those	who	are	not	Kṛṣṇa
conscious	are	certainly	engaged	in	sensory	consciousness;	therefore	they	need
to	execute	pious	work.	The	
yajña	
system	is	planned	in	such	a	way	that	sensory
conscious	persons	may	satisfy	their	desires	without	becoming	entangled	in	the
reaction	of	sense-gratificatory	work.	The	prosperity	of	the	world	depends	not
on	our	own	efforts	but	on	the	background	arrangement	of	the	Supreme	Lord,
directly	carried	out	by	the	demigods.	Therefore,	the	
yajñas	
are	directly	aimed
at	the	particular	demigod	mentioned	in	the	
Vedas.	
Indirectly,	it	is	the	practice
of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	because	when	one	masters	the	performance	of	
yajñas,
one	is	sure	to	become	Kṛṣṇa	conscious.	But	if	by	performing	
yajñas	
one	does
not	become	Kṛṣṇa	conscious,	such	principles	are	counted	as	only	moral	codes.
One	should	not,	therefore,	limit	his	progress	only	to	the	point	of	moral	codes,
but	should	transcend	them,	to	attain	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.TEXT	17
य ᇿ ᇰ व ा ᇰ म र ि त र े व
	
ᇿ य ा द ा ᇰ म त ृ ᇴ त ᇽ च
	
म ा न व ः
	
।
आ ᇰ म ᇳ य े व
	
च
	
स ᇳ त ु ᇾ ट ᇿ त ᇿ य
	
क ा य ᆾ
	
न
	
ि व ሱ त े
	
॥
१ ७
॥
yas	tv	ātma-ratir	eva	syād
ātma-tṛptaś	ca	mānavaḥ
ātmany	eva	ca	santuṣṭas
tasya	kāryaṁ	na	vidyate
yaḥ—
one	who;	
tu—
but;	
ātma-ratiḥ—
takes	pleasure;	
eva—
certainly;	
syāt—
remains;	
ātma-tṛptaḥ—
self-illuminated;	
ca—
and;	
mānavaḥ—
a	man;	
ātmani—
in	himself;	
eva—
only;	
ca—
and;	
santuṣṭaḥ—
perfectly	satiated;	
tasya—
his;
kāryam—
duty;	
na—
does	not;	
vidyate—
exist.
TRANSLATION
One	who	is,	however,	taking	pleasure	in	the	self,	who	is	illumined	in	the
self,	who	rejoices	in	and	is	satisfied	with	the	self	only,	fully	satiated—for
him	there	is	no	duty.
PURPORT
A	person	who	is	
fully	
Kṛṣṇa	conscious,	and	is	fully	satisfied	by	his	acts	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	no	longer	has	any	duty	to	perform.	Due	to	his	being
Kṛṣṇa	conscious,	all	impiety	within	is	instantly	cleansed,	an	effect	of	many,
many	thousands	of	
yajña
	performances.	By	such	clearing	of	consciousness,
one	becomes	fully	confident	of	his	eternal	position	in	relationship	with	the
Supreme.	His	duty	thus	becomes	self-illuminated	by	the	grace	of	the	Lord,
and	therefore	he	no	longer	has	any	obligations	to	the	Vedic	injunctions.	Such	a
Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	is	no	longer	interested	in	material	activities	and	no
longer	takes	pleasure	in	material	arrangements	like	wine,	women	and	similar
infatuations.
TEXT	18न ै व
	
त ᇿ य
	
क ृ त े न ा थ ो ᆼ
	
न ा क ृ त े न े ह
	
क ᇽ च न
	
।
न
	
च ा ᇿ य
	
स व ᆼ भ ू त े ष ु
	
क ि ᇽ च द थ ᆼ ᇼ य प ा श ् र य ः
	
॥
१ ८
॥
naiva	tasya	kṛtenārtho
nākṛteneha	kaścana
na	cāsya	sarva-bhūteṣu
kaścid	artha-vyapāśrayaḥ
na—
never;	
eva—
certainly;	
tasya—
his;	
kṛtena—
by	discharge	of	duty;	
arthaḥ
—
purpose;	
na—
nor;	
akṛtena—
without	discharge	of	duty;	
iha—
in	this	world;
kaścana—
whatever;	
na—
never;	
ca—
and;	
asya—
of	him;	
sarva-bhūteṣu	
—in
all	living	beings;	
kaścit—
any;	
artha—
purpose;	
vyapa-āśrayaḥ—
taking	shelter
of.
TRANSLATION
A	self-realized	man	has	no	purpose	to	fulfill	in	the	discharge	of	his
prescribed	duties,	nor	has	he	any	reason	not	to	perform	such	work.	Nor
has	he	any	need	to	depend	on	any	other	living	being.
PURPORT
A	self-realized	man	is	no	longer	obliged	to	perform	any	prescribed	duty,
save	and	except	activities	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	not
inactivity	either,	as	will	be	explained	in	the	following	verses.	A	Kṛṣṇa
conscious	man	does	not	take	shelter	of	any	person–man	or	demigod.	Whatever
he	does	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	sufficient	in	the	discharge	of	his	obligation.
TEXT	19
त ᇿ म ा द स ᇧ त ः
	
स त त ं
	
क ा य ᆾ
	
क म ᆼ
	
स म ा च र
	
।
अ स ᇧ त ो
	
ቋ ा च र ᇳ क म ᆼ
	
प र म ा ᇴ न ो ि त
	
प ू ኄ ष ः
	
॥
१ ९
॥
tasmād	asaktaḥ	satataṁ
kāryaṁ	karma	samācara
asakto	hy	ācaran	karmaparam	āpnoti	pūruṣaḥ
tasmāt—
therefore;	
asaktaḥ—
without	attachment;	
satatam—
constantly;
kāryam—
as	 duty;	
karma—
work;	
samācara—
perform;	
asaktaḥ
—
nonattachment;	
hi—
certainly;	
ācaran—
performing;	
karma—
work;	
param
—
the	Supreme;	
āpnoti—
achieves;	
pūruṣaḥ—
a	man.
TRANSLATION
Therefore,	without	being	attached	to	the	fruits	of	activities,	one	should
act	as	a	matter	of	duty;	for	by	working	without	attachment,	one	attains
the	Supreme.
PURPORT
The	Supreme	is	the	Personality	of	Godhead	for	the	devotees,	and	liberation
for	the	impersonalist.	A	person,	therefore,	acting	for	Kṛṣṇa,	or	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	under	proper	guidance	and	without	attachment	to	the	result	of
the	work,	is	certainly	making	progress	toward	the	supreme	goal	of	life.	Arjuna
is	told	that	he	should	fight	in	the	Battle	of	Kurukṣetra	for	the	interest	of	Kṛṣṇa
because	Kṛṣṇa	wanted	him	to	fight.	To	be	a	good	man	or	a	nonviolent	man	is	a
personal	attachment,	but	to	act	on	behalf	of	the	Supreme	is	to	act	without
attachment	for	the	result.	That	is	perfect	action	of	the	highest	degree,
recommended	by	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.	Vedic
rituals,	like	prescribed	sacrifices,	are	performed	for	purification	of	impious
activities	that	were	performed	in	the	field	of	sense	gratification.	But	action	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	transcendental	to	the	reactions	of	good	or	evil	work.	A
Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	has	no	attachment	for	the	result	but	acts	on	behalf	of
Kṛṣṇa	alone.	He	engages	in	all	kinds	of	activities,	but	is	completely
nonattached.
TEXT	20
क म ᆼ ण ै व
	
ि ह
	
स ं ि स द ् ि ध म ा ि ᇿ थ त ा
	
ज न क ा द य ः
	
।
ल ो क स ं ग ् र ह म े व ा ि प
	
स ᇸ प ᇽ य ᇳ क त ु ᆼ म ह ᆼ ि स
	
॥
२ ०
॥karmaṇaiva	hi	saṁsiddhim
āsthitā	janakādayaḥ
loka-saṅgraham	evāpi
sampaśyan	kartum	arhasi
karmaṇā—
by	work;	
eva—
even;	
hi—
certainly;	
saṁsiddhim—
perfection;
āsthitāḥ—
situated;	
janaka-ādayaḥ—
kings	like	Janaka	and	others;	
loka-
saṅgraham—
educating	the	people	in	general;	
eva—
also;	
api—
for	the	sake	of;
sampaśyan—
by	considering;	
kartum—
to	act;	
arhasi—
deserve.
TRANSLATION
Even	kings	like	Janaka	and	others	attained	the	perfectional	stage	by
performance	of	prescribed	duties.	Therefore,	just	for	the	sake	of
educating	the	people	in	general,	you	should	perform	your	work.
PURPORT
Kings	like	Janaka	and	others	were	all	self-realized	souls;	consequently	they
had	no	obligation	to	perform	the	prescribed	duties	in	the	
Vedas.	
Nonetheless
they	performed	all	prescribed	activities	just	to	set	examples	for	the	people	in
general.	Janaka	was	the	father	of	Sītā,	and	father-in-law	of	Lord	Śrī	Rāma.
Being	a	great	devotee	of	the	Lord,	he	was	transcendentally	situated,	but
because	he	was	the	King	of	Mithila	(a	subdivision	of	Behar	province	in	India),
he	had	to	teach	his	subjects	how	to	fight	righteously	in	battle.	He	and	his
subjects	fought	to	teach	people	in	general	that	violence	is	also	necessary	in	a
situation	where	good	arguments	fail.	Before	the	Battle	of	Kurukṣetra,	every
effort	was	made	to	avoid	the	war,	even	by	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead,	but	the	other	party	was	determined	to	fight.	So	for	such	a	right
cause,	there	is	a	necessity	for	fighting.	Although	one	who	is	situated	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	may	not	have	any	interest	in	the	world,	he	still	works	to	teach
the	public	how	to	live	and	how	to	act.	Experienced	persons	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	can	act	in	such	a	way	that	others	will	follow,	and	this	is
explained	in	the	following	verse.
TEXT	21य ሱ द ा च र ि त
	
श ् र े ᇾ ठ ᇿ त ሧ द े व े त र ो
	
ज न ः
	
।
स
	
य ᇰ प ् र म ा ण ं
	
क ु ኄ त े
	
ल ो क ᇿ त द न ु व त ᆼ त े
	
॥
२ १
॥
yad	yad	ācarati	śreṣṭhas
tat	tad	evetaro	janaḥ
sa	yat	pramāṇaṁ	kurute
lokas	tad	anuvartate
yat—
whatever;	
yat—
and	whichever;	
ācarati—
does	he	act;	
śreṣṭhaḥ—
respectable	leader;	
tat—
that;	
tat—
and	that	alone;	
eva—
certainly;	
itaraḥ—
common;	
janaḥ—
person;	
saḥ—
he;	
yat—
whichever;	
pramāṇam—
evidence;
kurute—
does	perform;	
lokaḥ—
all	the	world;	
tat—
that;	
anuvartate—
follow	in
the	footsteps.
TRANSLATION
Whatever	action	is	performed	by	a	great	man,	common	men	follow	in
his	footsteps.	And	whatever	standards	he	sets	by	exemplary	acts,	all	the
world	pursues.
PURPORT
People	in	general	always	require	a	leader	who	can	teach	the	public	by
practical	behavior.	A	leader	cannot	teach	the	public	to	stop	smoking	if	he
himself	smokes.	Lord	Caitanya	said	that	a	teacher	should	behave	properly
even	before	he	begins	teaching.	One	who	teaches	in	that	way	is	called	
ācārya
,
or	the	ideal	teacher.	Therefore,	a	teacher	must	follow	the	principles	of	
śāśtra
(scripture)	to	reach	the	common	man.	The	teacher	cannot	manufacture	rules
against	the	principles	of	revealed	scriptures.	The	revealed	scriptures,	like
Manu-saṁhitā	
and	similar	others,	are	considered	the	standard	books	to	be
followed	by	human	society.	Thus	the	leader's	teaching	should	be	based	on	the
principles	of	the	standard	rules	as	they	are	practiced	by	the	great	teachers.	The
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
also	affirms	that	one	should	follow	in	the	footsteps	of
great	devotees,	and	that	is	the	way	of	progress	on	the	path	of	spiritual
realization.	The	king	or	the	executive	head	of	a	state,	the	father	and	the	school
teacher	are	all	considered	to	be	natural	leaders	of	the	innocent	people	in
general.	All	such	natural	leaders	have	a	great	responsibility	to	theirdependants;	therefore	they	must	be	conversant	with	standard	books	of	moral
and	spiritual	codes.
TEXT	22
न
	
म े
	
प ा थ ा ᆼ ि ᇿ त
	
क त ᆼ ᇼ य ं
	
ि त ् र ष ु
	
ल ो क े ष ु
	
ि क ᇮ च न
	
।
न ा न व ा ᇴ त म व ा ᇴ त ᇼ य ं
	
व त ᆼ
	
ए व
	
च
	
क म ᆼ ि ण
	
॥
२ २
॥
na	me	pārthāsti	kartavyaṁ
triṣu	lokeṣu	kiñcana
nānavāptam	avāptavyaṁ
varta	eva	ca	karmaṇi
na—
none;	
me—
Mine;	
pārtha—
O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
asti—
there	is;	
kartavyam—
any	prescribed	duty;	
triṣu—
in	the	three;	
lokeṣu—
planetary	systems;	
kiñcana
—anything;	
na—
no;	
anavāptam—
in	want;	
avāptavyam—
to	be	gained;	
varte
—
engaged;	
eva—
certainly;	
ca—
also;	
karmaṇi—
in	one's	prescribed	duty.
TRANSLATION
O	son	of	Pṛthā,	there	is	no	work	prescribed	for	Me	within	all	the	three
planetary	systems.	Nor	am	I	in	want	of	anything,	nor	have	I	need	to
obtain	anything—and	yet	I	am	engaged	in	work.
PURPORT
The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is	described	in	the	Vedic	literatures	as
follows:
tam	īśvarāṇāṁ	paramaṁ	maheśvaraṁ
taṁ	devatānāṁ	paramaṁ	ca	daivatam
patiṁ	patīnāṁ	paramaṁ	parastād
vidāma	devaṁ	bhuvaneśam	īḍyam
na	tasya	kāryaṁ	karaṇaṁ	ca	vidyate
na	tat-samaś	cābhyadhikaś	ca	dṛśyateparāsya	śaktir	vividhaiva	śrūyate
svā-bhāvikī	jñāna-bala-kriyā	ca.
"The	Supreme	Lord	is	the	controller	of	all	other	controllers,	and	He	is	the
greatest	of	all	the	diverse	planetary	leaders.	Everyone	is	under	His	control.	All
entities	are	delegated	with	particular	power	only	by	the	Supreme	Lord;	they
are	not	supreme	themselves.	He	is	also	worshipable	by	all	demigods	and	is	the
supreme	director	of	all	directors.	Therefore,	He	is	transcendental	to	all	kinds
of	material	leaders	and	controllers	and	is	worshipable	by	all.	There	is	no	one
greater	than	Him,	and	He	is	the	supreme	cause	of	all	causes.
"He	does	not	possess	bodily	form	like	that	of	an	ordinary	living	entity.
There	is	no	difference	between	His	body	and	His	soul.	He	is	absolute.	All	His
senses	are	transcendental.	Any	one	of	His	senses	can	perform	the	action	of
any	other	sense.	Therefore,	no	one	is	greater	than	Him	or	equal	to	Him.	His
potencies	are	multifarious,	and	thus	His	deeds	are	automatically	performed	as
a	natural	sequence."	
(Śvetāśvatara	Upaniṣad
	6.7-8)
Since	everything	is	in	full	opulence	in	the	Personality	of	Godhead	and	is
existing	in	full	truth,	there	is	no	duty	for	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead
to	perform.	One	who	must	receive	the	results	of	work	has	some	designated
duty,	but	one	who	has	nothing	to	achieve	within	the	three	planetary	systems
certainly	has	no	duty.	And	yet	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	engaged	on	the	Battlefield	of
Kurukṣetra	as	the	leader	of	the	
kṣatriyas	
because	the	
kṣatriyas	
are	duty-bound
to	give	protection	to	the	distressed.	Although	He	is	above	all	the	regulations	of
the	revealed	scriptures,	He	does	not	do	anything	that	violates	the	revealed
scriptures.
TEXT	23
य ि द
	
ቋ ह ं
	
न
	
व त ᆹ य ं
	
ज ा त ु
	
क म ᆼ ᇯ य त ि ᇳ द ् र त ः
	
।
म म
	
व ᇰ म ा ᆼ न ु व त ᆼ ᇳ त े
	
म न ु ᇾ य ा ः
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
स व ᆼ श ः
	
॥
२ ३
॥
yadi	hy	ahaṁ	na	varteyaṁ
jātu	karmaṇy	atandritaḥ
mama	vartmānuvartante
manuṣyāḥ	pārtha	sarvaśaḥ
yadi—
if;	
hi—
certainly;	
aham—
I;	
na—
do	not;	
varteyam—
thus	engage;	
jātu
—
ever;	
karmaṇi—
in	the	performance	of	prescribed	duties;	
atandritaḥ—
withgreat	care;	
mama—
My;	
vartma—
path;	
anuvartante—
would	follow;	
manuṣyāḥ
—
all	men
;	pārtha—
O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
sarvaśaḥ—
in	all	respects.
TRANSLATION
For,	if	I	did	not	engage	in	work,	O	Pārtha,	certainly	all	men	would
follow	My	path.
PURPORT
In	order	to	keep	the	balance	of	social	tranquility	for	progress	in	spiritual
life,	there	are	traditional	family	usages	meant	for	every	civilized	man.
Although	such	rules	and	regulations	are	for	the	conditioned	souls	and	not	Lord
Kṛṣṇa,	because	He	descended	to	establish	the	principles	of	religion,	He
followed	the	prescribed	rules.	Otherwise,	common	men	would	follow	in	His
footsteps	because	He	is	the	greatest	authority.	From	the	
Śrīmad-	Bhāgavatam
it	is	understood	that	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	was	performing	all	the	religious	duties	at
home	and	out	of	home,	as	required	of	a	householder.
TEXT	24
उ ᇰ स ी द े य ु ि र म े
	
ल ो क ा
	
न
	
क ु य ा ᆾ
	
क म ᆼ
	
च े द ह म ्
	
।
स ङ ् क र ᇿ य
	
च
	
क त ा ᆼ
	
ᇿ य ा म ु प ह ᇳ य ा ि म म ा ः
	
प ् र ज ा ः
	
॥
२ ४
॥
utsīdeyur	ime	lokā
na	kuryāṁ	karma	ced	aham
saṅkarasya	ca	kartā	syām
upahanyām	imāḥ	prajāḥ
utsīdeyuḥ—
put	into	ruin;	
ime—
all	these;	
lokāḥ—
worlds;	
na—
do	not;
kuryām—
perform;	
karma—
prescribed	duties;	
cet—
if;	
aham—
I;
	saṅkarasya—
of	unwanted	population;	
ca—
and;	
kartā—
creator;	
syām—
shall	be;	
upahanyām
—
destroy;	
imāḥ—
all	these;	
prajāḥ—
living	entities.
TRANSLATIONIf	I	should	cease	to	work,	then	all	these	worlds	would	be	put	to
ruination.	I	would	also	be	the	cause	of	creating	unwanted	population,	and
I	would	thereby	destroy	the	peace	of	all	sentient	beings.
PURPORT
Varṇa-saṅkara
	is	unwanted	population	which	disturbs	the	peace	of	the
general	society.	In	order	to	check	this	social	disturbance,	there	are	prescribed
rules	and	regulations	by	which	the	population	can	automatically	become
peaceful	and	organized	for	spiritual	progress	in	life.	When	Lord	Kṛṣṇa
descends,	naturally	He	deals	with	such	rules	and	regulations	in	order	to
maintain	the	prestige	and	necessity	of	such	important	performances.	The	Lord
is	the	father	of	all	living	entities,	and	if	the	living	entities	are	misguided,
indirectly	the	responsibility	goes	to	the	Lord.	Therefore,	whenever	there	is
general	disregard	of	regulative	principles,	the	Lord	Himself	descends	and
corrects	the	society.	We	should,	however,	note	carefully	that	although	we	have
to	follow	in	the	footsteps	of	the	Lord,	we	still	have	to	remember	that	we
cannot	imitate	Him.	Following	and	imitating	are	not	on	the	same	level.	We
cannot	imitate	the	Lord	by	lifting	Govardhana	Hill,	as	the	Lord	did	in	His
childhood.	It	is	impossible	for	any	human	being.	We	have	to	follow	His
instructions,	but	we	may	not	imitate	Him	at	any	time.	The	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam	
affirms:
naitat	samācarej	jātu	manasāpi	hy	anīśvaraḥ	
vinaśyaty	ācaran	mauḍhyād	yathā	'rudro	'bdhijaṁ	viṣam
īśvarāṇāṁ	vacaḥ	satyaṁ	tathaivācaritaṁ	kvacit
teṣāṁ	yat	sva-vaco	yuktaṁ	buddhimāṁs	tat	samācaret
"One	should	simply	follow	the	instructions	of	the	Lord	and	His	empowered
servants.	Their	instructions	are	all	good	for	us,	and	any	intelligent	person	will
perform	them	as	instructed.	However,	one	should	guard	against	trying	to
imitate	their	actions.	One	should	not	try	to	drink	the	ocean	of	poison	in
imitation	of	Lord	Śiva."	
(Bhāg.	
10.33.30)
We	should	always	consider	the	position	of	the	
īśvaras,	
or	those	who	can
actually	control	the	movements	of	the	sun	and	moon,	as	superior.	Without
such	power,	one	cannot	imitate	the	
īśvaras,	
who	are	superpowerful.	Lord	Śivadrank	poison	to	the	extent	of	swallowing	an	ocean,	but	if	any	common	man
tries	to	drink	even	a	fragment	of	such	poison,	he	will	be	killed.	There	are
many	psuedo-devotees	of	Lord	Śiva	who	want	to	indulge	in	smoking	gāñjā
(marijuana)	and	similar	intoxicating	drugs,	forgetting	that	by	so	imitating	the
acts	of	Lord	Śiva	they	are	calling	death	very	near.	Similarly,	there	are	some
psuedo-devotees	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	who	prefer	to	imitate	the	Lord	in	His	
rāsa-līlā,
or	dance	of	love,	forgetting	their	inability	to	lift	Govardhana	Hill.	It	is	best,
therefore,	that	one	not	try	to	imitate	the	powerful,	but	simply	follow	their
instructions;	nor	should	one	try	to	occupy	their	posts	without	qualification.
There	are	so	many	"incarnations"	of	God	without	the	power	of	the	Supreme
Godhead.
TEXT	25
स ᇧ त ा ः
	
क म ᆼ ᇯ य ि व ሲ ा ं स ो
	
य थ ा
	
क ु व ᆼ ि ᇳ त
	
भ ा र त
	
।
क ु य ा ᆼ द ् ि व ሲ ा ं ᇿ त थ ा स ᇧ त ि ᇽ च क ी ष ु ᆼ ल ो ᆼ क स ं ग ् र ह म ्
	
॥
२ ५
॥
saktāḥ	karmaṇy	avidvāṁso
yathā	kurvanti	bhārata
kuryād	vidvāṁs	tathāsaktaś
cikīrṣur	loka-saṅgraham
saktāḥ—
being	attached;	
karmaṇi—
prescribed	duties;	
avidvāṁsaḥ—
the
ignorant;	
yathā—
as	much	as;	
kurvanti—
do	it;	
bhārata
—O	descendant	of
Bharata;	
kuryāt—
must	do;	
vidvān—
the	learned;	
tathā—
thus;	
asaktaḥ—
without	attachment;	
cikīrṣuḥ—
desiring	to;	
loka-saṅgraham—
leading	the
people	in	general.
TRANSLATION
As	the	ignorant	perform	their	duties	with	attachment	to	results,
similarly	the	learned	may	also	act,	but	without	attachment,	for	the	sake	of
leading	people	on	the	right	path.
PURPORTA	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	a	person	not	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness
are	differentiated	by	different	desires.	A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	does	not	do
anything	which	is	not	conducive	to	development	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	He
may	even	act	exactly	like	the	ignorant	person,	who	is	too	much	attached	to
material	activities,	but	one	is	engaged	in	such	activities	for	the	satisfaction	of
his	sense	gratification,	whereas	the	other	is	engaged	for	the	satisfaction	of
Kṛṣṇa.	Therefore,	the	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	is	required	to	show	the	people
how	to	act	and	how	to	engage	the	results	of	action	for	the	purpose	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.
TEXT	26
न
	
ब ु द ् ि ध भ े द ं
	
ज न य े द ᇥ ा न ा ं
	
क म ᆼ स ङ ् ि ग न ा म ्
	
।
ज ो ष य े ᇰ स व ᆼ क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
ि व ሲ ा ᇳ य ु ᇧ त ः
	
स म ा च र न ्
	
॥
२ ६
॥
na	buddhi-bhedaṁ	janayed
ajñānāṁ	karma-saṅginām
joṣayet	sarva-karmāṇi
vidvān	yuktaḥ	samācaran
na—
do	not;	
buddhi-bhedam—
disrupt	the	intelligence;	
janayet—
do;
ajñānām—
of	the	foolish;	
karma-saṅginām—
attached	to	fruitive	work;	
joṣayet
—
dovetailed;	
sarva—
all;	
karmāṇi—
work;	
vidvān—
learned;	
yuktaḥ—	
all
engaged;	
samācaran—
practicing.
TRANSLATION
Let	not	the	wise	disrupt	the	minds	of	the	ignorant	who	are	attached	to
fruitive	action.	They	should	not	be	encouraged	to	refrain	from	work,	but
to	engage	in	work	in	the	spirit	of	devotion.
PURPORT
Vedaiś	ca	sarvair	aham	eva	vedyaḥ:
	that	is	the	end	of	all	Vedic	rituals.	All
rituals,	all	performances	of	sacrifices,	and	everything	that	is	put	into	theVedas
,	including	all	directions	for	material	activities,	are	meant	for
understanding	Kṛṣṇa,	who	is	the	ultimate	goal	of	life.	But	because	the
conditioned	souls	do	not	know	anything	beyond	sense	gratification,	they	study
the	
Vedas	
to	that	end.	Through	sense	regulations,	however,	one	is	gradually
elevated	to	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Therefore	a	realized	soul	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	should	not	disturb	others	in	their	activities	or	understanding,
but	he	should	act	by	showing	how	the	results	of	all	work	can	be	dedicated	to
the	service	of	Kṛṣṇa.	The	learned	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	may	act	in	such	a
way	that	the	ignorant	person	working	for	sense	gratification	may	learn	how	to
act	and	how	to	behave.	Although	the	ignorant	man	is	not	to	be	disturbed	in	his
activities,	still,	a	slightly	developed	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	may	directly	be
engaged	in	the	service	of	the	Lord	without	waiting	for	other	Vedic	formulas.
For	this	fortunate	man	there	is	no	need	to	follow	the	Vedic	rituals,	because	in
direct	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	one	can	have	all	the	results	simply	by	following
the	prescribed	duties	of	a	particular	person.
TEXT	27
प ् र क ृ त े ः
	
ि क ् र य म ा ण ा ि न
	
ग ु ण ै ः
	
क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
स व ᆼ श ः
	
।
अ ह ङ ् क ा र ि व म ू ढ ा ᇰ म ा
	
क त ा ᆼ ह ि म ि त
	
म ᇳ य त े
	
॥
२ ७
॥
prakṛteḥ	kriyamāṇāni
guṇaiḥ	karmāṇi	sarvaśaḥ
ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā
kartāham	iti	manyate
prakṛteḥ—
of	material	nature;	
kriyamāṇāni—
all	being	done;	
guṇaiḥ—
by	the
modes;	
karmāṇi—
activities;	
sarvaśaḥ—
all	kinds	of;
	ahaṅkāra-vimūḍha—
bewildered	by	false	ego;	
ātmā—
the	spirit	soul;	
kartā—
doer;	
aham—
I;
	iti—
thus;	
manyate
—thinks.
TRANSLATION
The	bewildered	spirit	soul,	under	the	influence	of	the	three	modes	of
material	nature,	thinks	himself	to	be	the	doer	of	activities,	which	are	in
actuality	carried	out	by	nature.PURPORT
Two	persons,	one	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	the	other	in	material
consciousness,	working	on	the	same	level,	may	appear	to	be	working	on	the
same	platform,	but	there	is	a	wide	gulf	of	difference	in	their	respective
positions.	The	person	in	material	consciousness	is	convinced	by	false	ego	that
he	is	the	doer	of	everything.	He	does	not	know	that	the	mechanism	of	the
body	is	produced	by	material	nature,	which	works	under	the	supervision	of	the
Supreme	Lord.	The	materialistic	person	has	no	knowledge	that	ultimately	he
is	under	the	control	of	Kṛṣṇa.	The	person	in	false	ego	takes	all	credit	for	doing
everything	independently,	and	that	is	the	symptom	of	his	nescience.	He	does
not	know	that	this	gross	and	subtle	body	is	the	creation	of	material	nature,
under	the	order	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	and	as	such	his	bodily
and	mental	activities	should	be	engaged	in	the	service	of	Kṛṣṇa,	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	The	ignorant	man	forgets	that	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead	is	known	as	Hṛṣīkeśa,	or	the	master	of	the	senses	of	the	material
body,	for	due	to	his	long	misuse	of	the	senses	in	sense	gratification,	he	is
factually	bewildered	by	the	false	ego,	which	makes	him	forget	his	eternal
relationship	with	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	28
त ᇰ ᇰ व ि व ሧ ु
	
म ह ा ब ा ह ो
	
ग ु ण क म ᆼ ि व भ ा ग य ो ः
	
।
ग ु ण ा
	
ग ु ण े ष ु
	
व त ᆼ ᇳ त
	
इ ि त
	
म ᇰ व ा
	
न
	
स ᇬ ज त े
	
॥
२ ८
॥
tattvavit	tu	mahā-bāho
guṇa-karma-vibhāgayoḥ
guṇā	guṇeṣu	vartanta
iti	matvā	na	sajjate
tattvavit—
the	knower	of	the	Absolute	Truth;	
tu—
but;	
mahā-bāho—
O
mighty-armed	one;	
guṇa-karma—
works	under	material	influence;	
vibhāgayoḥ
—
differences;	
guṇāḥ—
senses;	
guṇeṣu—
in	sense	gratification;	
vartante—
being	engaged;	
iti—
thus;	
matvā—
thinking;	
na—
never;	
sajjate—
becomes
attached.
TRANSLATIONOne	who	is	in	knowledge	of	the	Absolute	Truth,	O	mighty-armed,	does
not	engage	himself	in	the	senses	and	sense	gratification,	knowing	well	the
differences	between	work	in	devotion	and	work	for	fruitive	results.
PURPORT
The	knower	of	the	Absolute	Truth	is	convinced	of	his	awkward	position	in
material	association.	He	knows	that	he	is	part	and	parcel	of	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	and	that	his	position	should	not	be	in	the
material	creation.	He	knows	his	real	identity	as	part	and	parcel	of	the
Supreme,	who	is	eternal	bliss	and	knowledge,	and	he	realizes	that	somehow	or
other	he	is	entrapped	in	the	material	conception	of	life.	In	his	pure	state	of
existence	he	is	meant	to	dovetail	his	activities	in	devotional	service	to	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa.	He	therefore	engages	himself	in	the
activities	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	becomes	naturally	unattached	to	the
activities	of	the	material	senses,	which	are	all	circumstantial	and	temporary.
He	knows	that	his	material	condition	of	life	is	under	the	supreme	control	of
the	Lord;	consequently	he	is	not	disturbed	by	all	kinds	of	material	reactions,
which	he	considers	to	be	the	mercy	of	the	Lord.	According	to	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam,	
one	who	knows	the	Absolute	Truth	in	three	different	features–
namely	Brahman,	Paramātmā,	and	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead–is
called	
tattvavit,	
for	he	knows	also	his	own	factual	position	in	relationship	with
the	Supreme.
TEXT	29
प ् र क ृ त े ग ु ᆼ ण स ᇸ म ू ढ ा ः
	
स ᇬ ज ᇳ त े
	
ग ु ण क म ᆼ स ु
	
।
त ा न क ृ ᇰ ᇿ न ि व द ो
	
म ᇳ द ा ᇳ क ृ ᇰ ᇿ न ि व ᇳ न
	
ि व च ा ल य े त ्
	
॥
२ ९
॥
prakṛter	guṇa-saṁmūḍhāḥ
sajjante	guṇa-karmasu
tān	akṛtsna-vido	mandān
kṛtsna-vin	na	vicālayet
prakṛteḥ—
impelled	by	the	material	modes;	
guṇa-saṁmūḍhāḥ—
befooled	by
material	identification;	
sajjante—
become	engaged;	
guṇa-karmasu—
inmaterial	activities;	
tān—
all	those;	
akṛtsna-vidaḥ—
persons	with	a	poor	fund	of
knowledge;	
mandān—
lazy	to	understand	self-realization;	
kṛtsna-vit—
one	who
is	in	factual	knowledge;	
na—
may	not;	
vicālayet—
try	to	agitate.
TRANSLATION
Bewildered	by	the	modes	of	material	nature,	the	ignorant	fully	engage
themselves	in	material	activities	and	become	attached.	But	the	wise
should	not	unsettle	them,	although	these	duties	are	inferior	due	to	the
performers'	lack	of	knowledge.
PURPORT
Persons	who	are	unknowledgeable	falsely	identify	with	gross	material
consciousness	and	are	full	of	material	designations.	This	body	is	a	gift	of	the
material	nature,	and	one	who	is	too	much	attached	to	the	bodily	consciousness
is	called	
mandān
,	or	a	lazy	person	without	understanding	of	spirit	soul.
Ignorant	men	think	of	the	body	as	the	self;	bodily	connections	with	others	are
accepted	as	kinsmanship;	the	land	in	which	the	body	is	obtained	is	the	object
of	worship;	and	the	formalities	of	religious	rituals	are	considered	ends	in
themselves.	Social	work,	nationalism,	and	altruism	are	some	of	the	activities
for	such	materially	designated	persons.	Under	the	spell	of	such	designations,
they	are	always	busy	in	the	material	field;	for	them	spiritual	realization	is	a
myth,	and	so	they	are	not	interested.	Such	bewildered	persons	may	even	be
engaged	in	such	primary	moral	principles	of	life	as	nonviolence	and	similar
materially	benevolent	work.	Those	who	are,	however,	enlightened	in	spiritual
life,	should	not	try	to	agitate	such	materially	engrossed	persons.	Better	to
prosecute	one's	own	spiritual	activities	silently.
Men	who	are	ignorant	cannot	appreciate	activities	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,
and	therefore	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	advises	us	not	to	disturb	them	and	simply	waste
valuable	time.	But	the	devotees	of	the	Lord	are	more	kind	than	the	Lord
because	they	understand	the	purpose	of	the	Lord.	Consequently	they
undertake	all	kinds	of	risks,	even	to	the	point	of	approaching	ignorant	men	to
try	to	engage	them	in	the	acts	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	which	are	absolutely
necessary	for	the	human	being.
TEXT	30म ि य
	
स व ा ᆼ ि ण
	
क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
स ं ᇳ य ᇿ य ा ᇲ य ा ᇰ म च े त स ा
	
।
ि न र ा श ी ि न ᆼ म ᆼ म ो
	
भ ू ᇰ व ा
	
य ु ᇲ य ᇿ व
	
ि व ग त ᇬ व र ः
	
॥
३ ०
॥
mayi	sarvāṇi	karmāṇi
sannyasyādhyātma-cetasā
nirāśīr	nirmamo	bhūtvā
yudhyasva	vigata-jvaraḥ
mayi—
unto	Me;	
sarvāṇi—
all	sorts	of;	
karmāṇi—
activities;	
sannyasya—
giving	up	completely;	
adhyātma—
with	full	knowledge	of	the	self;	
cetasā—
consciousness;	
nirāśīḥ—
without	desire	for	profit;	
nirmamaḥ—
without
ownership;	
bhūtvā—
so	being;	
yudhyasva—
fight;	
vigata-jvaraḥ—
without
being	lethargic.
TRANSLATION
Therefore,	O	Arjuna,	surrendering	all	your	works	unto	Me,	with	mind
intent	on	Me,	and	without	desire	for	gain	and	free	from	egoism	and
lethargy,	fight.
PURPORT
This	verse	clearly	indicates	the	purpose	of	the	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
The	Lord
instructs	that	one	has	to	become	fully	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	to	discharge	duties,	as
if	in	military	discipline.	Such	an	injunction	may	make	things	a	little	difficult;
nevertheless	duties	must	be	carried	out,	with	dependence	on	Kṛṣṇa,	because
that	is	the	constitutional	position	of	the	living	entity.	The	living	entity	cannot
be	happy	independant	of	the	cooperation	of	the	Supreme	Lord	because	the
eternal	constitutional	position	of	the	living	entity	is	to	become	subordinate	to
the	desires	of	the	Lord.	Arjuna	was,	therefore,	ordered	by	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	to	fight	as
if	the	Lord	were	his	military	commander.	One	has	to	sacrifice	everything	for
the	good	will	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	and	at	the	same	time	discharge	prescribed
duties	without	claiming	proprietorship.	Arjuna	did	not	have	to	consider	the
order	of	the	Lord;	he	had	only	to	execute	His	order.	The	Supreme	Lord	is	the
Soul	of	all	souls;	therefore,	one	who	depends	solely	and	wholly	on	the
Supreme	Soul	without	personal	consideration,	or	in	other	words,	one	who	is
fully	Kṛṣṇa	conscious,	is	called	
adhyātma-	cetasā.	Nirāśīḥ	
means	that	one	hasto	act	on	the	order	of	the	master.	Nor	should	one	ever	expect	fruitive	results.
The	cashier	may	count	millions	of	dollars	for	his	employer,	but	he	does	not
claim	a	cent	for	himself.	Similarly,	one	has	to	realize	that	nothing	in	the	world
belongs	to	any	individual	person,	but	that	everything	belongs	to	the	Supreme
Lord.	That	is	the	real	purport	of	
mayi,	
or	unto	Me.	And	when	one	acts	in	such
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	certainly	he	does	not	claim	proprietorship	over	anything.
This	consciousness	is	called	
nirmama,	
or	nothing	is	mine.	And,	if	there	is	any
reluctance	to	execute	such	a	stern	order	which	is	without	consideration	of	so-
called	kinsmen	in	the	bodily	relationship,	that	reluctance	should	be	thrown	off;
in	this	way	one	may	become	
vigata-jvara,	
or	without	feverish	mentality	or
lethargy.	Everyone,	according	to	his	quality	and	position,	has	a	particular	type
of	work	to	discharge,	and	all	such	duties	may	be	discharged	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	as	described	above.	That	will	lead	one	to	the	path	of	liberation.
TEXT	31
य े
	
म े
	
म त ि म द ं
	
ि न ᇰ य म न ु ि त ᇾ ठ ि ᇳ त
	
म ा न व ा ः
	
।
श ् र ሬ ा व ᇳ त ो ऽ न स ू य ᇳ त ो
	
म ु ᇫ य ᇳ त े
	
त े ऽ ि प
	
क म ᆼ ि भ ः
	
॥
३ १
॥
ye	me	matam	idaṁ	nityam
anutiṣṭhanti	mānavāḥ
śraddhāvanto	'nasūyanto
mucyante	te	'pi	karmabhiḥ
ye—
those;	
me—
My;
	matam—
injunctions;	
idam—
this;	
nityam—
eternal
function;	
anutiṣṭhanti—
execute	 regularly;	
mānavāḥ—
humankind;
śraddhāvantaḥ—
with	faith	and	devotion;	
anasūyantaḥ—
without	envy;
mucyante—	
become	free;	
te—
all	of	them;	
api—
even;	
karmabhiḥ—
from	the
bondage	of	the	law	of	fruitive	action.
TRANSLATION
One	who	executes	his	duties	according	to	My	injunctions	and	who
follows	this	teaching	faithfully,	without	envy,	becomes	free	from	the
bondage	of	fruitive	actions.PURPORT
The	injunction	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	is	the
essence	of	all	Vedic	wisdom,	and	therefore	is	eternally	true	without	exception.
As	the	
Vedas	
are	eternal,	so	this	truth	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	also	eternal.
One	should	have	firm	faith	in	this	injunction,	without	envying	the	Lord.	There
are	many	philosophers	who	write	comments	on	the	
Bhagavad-	gītā
	but	have
no	faith	in	Kṛṣṇa.	They	will	never	be	liberated	from	the	bondage	of	fruitive
action.	But	an	ordinary	man	with	firm	faith	in	the	eternal	injunctions	of	the
Lord,	even	though	unable	to	execute	such	orders,	becomes	liberated	from	the
bondage	of	the	law	of	
karma.	
In	the	beginning	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	one
may	not	fully	discharge	the	injunctions	of	the	Lord,	but	because	one	is	not
resentful	of	this	principle	and	works	sincerely	without	consideration	of	defeat
and	hopelessness,	he	will	surely	be	promoted	to	the	stage	of	pure	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.
TEXT	32
य े
	
ᇰ व े त द ᇷ य स ू य ᇳ त ो
	
न ा न ु ि त ᇾ ठ ि ᇳ त
	
म े
	
म त म ्
	
।
स व ᆼ ᇥ ा न ि व म ू ढ ा ं ᇿ त ा ि ᇳ व द ् ि ध
	
न ᇾ ट ा न च े त स ः
	
॥
३ २
॥
ye	tv	etad	abhyasūyanto
nānutiṣṭhanti	me	matam
sarva-jñāna-vimūḍhāṁs	tān
viddhi	naṣṭān	acetasaḥ
ye—
those;	
tu—
however;	
etat—
this;	
abhyasūyantaḥ—
out	of	envy;	
na—
do
not;	
anutiṣṭhanti—
regularly	perform;	
me—
My;	
matam—
injunction;	
sarva-
jñāna—
all	sorts	of	knowledge;	
vimūḍhān—
perfectly	befooled;	
tān—
they	are;
viddhi—
know	it	well;	
naṣṭān—
all	ruined;	
acetasaḥ—
without	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.
TRANSLATION
But	those	who,	out	of	envy,	disregard	these	teachings	and	do	notpractice	them	regularly,	are	to	be	considered	bereft	of	all	knowledge,
befooled,	and	doomed	to	ignorance	and	bondage.
PURPORT
The	flaw	of	not	being	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	is	clearly	stated	herein.	As	there	is
punishment	for	disobedience	to	the	order	of	the	supreme	executive	head,	so
there	is	certainly	punishment	for	the	disobedience	of	the	order	of	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.	A	disobedient	person,	however	great	he	may	be,	is
ignorant	of	his	own	self,	of	the	Supreme	Brahman,	and	Paramātmā	and	the
Personality	of	Godhead,	due	to	a	vacant	heart.	Therefore	there	is	no	hope	of
perfection	of	life	for	him.
TEXT	33
स द ृ श ं
	
च े ᇾ ट त े
	
ᇿ व ᇿ य ा ः
	
प ् र क ृ त े ᇥ ा ᆼ न व ा न ि प
	
।
प ् र क ृ ि त ं
	
य ा ि ᇳ त
	
भ ू त ा ि न
	
ि न ग ् र ह ः
	
ि क ं
	
क ि र ᇾ य ि त
	
॥
३ ३
॥
sadṛśaṁ	ceṣṭate	svasyāḥ
prakṛter	jñānavān	api
prakṛtiṁ	yānti	bhūtāni
nigrahah	kiṁ	kariṣyati
sadṛśam—
accordingly;	
ceṣṭate—
tries;	
svasyāḥ—
in	one's	own	nature;
prakṛteḥ—
modes;	
jñānavān—
the	learned;	
api—
although;	
prakṛtim—
nature;
yānti—
undergo;	
bhūtāni
—all	living	entities;	
nigrahaḥ—
suppression;	
kim—
what;	
kariṣyati—
can	do.
TRANSLATION
Even	a	man	of	knowledge	acts	according	to	his	own	nature,	for
everyone	follows	his	nature.	What	can	repression	accomplish?
PURPORT
Unless	one	is	situated	on	the	transcendental	platform	of	Kṛṣṇaconsciousness,	he	cannot	get	free	from	the	influence	of	the	modes	of	material
nature,	as	it	is	confirmed	by	the	Lord	in	the	Seventh	Chapter	(7.14).
Therefore,	even	for	the	most	highly	educated	person	on	the	mundane	plane,	it
is	impossible	to	get	out	of	the	entanglement	of	
māyā
	simply	by	theoretical
knowledge,	or	by	separating	the	soul	from	the	body.	There	are	many	so-	called
spiritualists	who	outwardly	pose	to	be	advanced	in	the	science,	but	inwardly
or	privately	are	completely	under	the	particular	modes	of	nature	which	they
are	unable	to	surpass.	Academically,	one	may	be	very	learned,	but	because	of
his	long	association	with	material	nature,	he	is	in	bondage.	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	helps	one	to	get	out	of	the	material	entanglement,	even	though
one	may	be	engaged	in	his	prescribed	duties.	Therefore,	without	being	fully	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	no	one	should	suddenly	give	up	his	prescribed	duties
and	become	a	so-called	
yogī
	or	transcendentalist	artificially.	It	is	better	to	be
situated	in	one's	position	and	to	try	to	attain	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	under
superior	training.	Thus	one	may	be	freed	from	the	clutches	of	
māyā
.
TEXT	34
इ ि ᇳ द ् र य ᇿ य े ि ᇳ द ् र य ᇿ य ा थ ᆹ
	
र ा ग ሲ े ष ौ
	
ᇼ य व ि ᇿ थ त ौ
	
।
त य ो न ᆼ
	
व श म ा ग ᇫ छ े ሧ ौ
	
ቋ ᇿ य
	
प ि र प ि ᇳ थ न ौ
	
॥
३ ४
॥
indriyasyendriyasyārthe
rāga-dveṣau	vyavasthitau
tayor	na	vaśam	āgacchet
tau	hy	asya	paripanthinau
indriyasya—
of	the	senses;	
indriyasya	arthe—
in	the	sense	objects;	
rāga—
attachment;	
dveṣau—
also	in	detachment;	
vyavasthitau—
put	under	regulations;
tayoḥ—
of	them;	
na—
never;	
vaśam—
control;	
āgacchet—
one	should	come;	
tau
—
those;	
hi—
certainly	are;	
asya—
his;	
paripanthinau—
stumbling	blocks.
TRANSLATION
Attraction	and	repulsion	for	sense	objects	are	felt	by	embodied	beings,
but	one	should	not	fall	under	the	control	of	senses	and	sense	objects
because	they	are	stumbling	blocks	on	the	path	of	self-realization.PURPORT
Those	who	are	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	are	naturally	reluctant	to	engage	in
material	sense	gratifications.	But	those	who	are	not	in	such	consciousness
should	follow	the	rules	and	regulations	of	the	revealed	scriptures.	Unrestricted
sense	enjoyment	is	the	cause	of	material	encagement,	but	one	who	follows	the
rules	and	regulations	of	the	revealed	scriptures	does	not	become	entangled	by
the	sense	objects.	For	example,	sex	enjoyment	is	a	necessity	for	the
conditioned	soul,	and	sex	enjoyment	is	allowed	under	the	license	of	marriage
ties.	For	example,	according	to	scriptural	injunctions,	one	is	forbidden	to
engage	in	sex	relationships	with	any	women	other	than	one's	wife.	All	other
women	are	to	be	considered	as	one's	mother.	But,	in	spite	of	such	injunctions,
a	man	is	still	inclined	to	have	sex	relationships	with	other	women.	These
propensities	are	to	be	curbed;	otherwise	they	will	be	stumbling	blocks	on	the
path	of	self-realization.	As	long	as	the	material	body	is	there,	the	necessities	of
the	material	body	are	allowed,	but	under	rules	and	regulations.	And	yet,	we
should	not	rely	upon	the	control	of	such	allowances.	One	has	to	follow	those
rules	and	regulations,	unattached	to	them,	because	practice	of	sense
gratifications	under	regulations	may	also	lead	one	to	go	astray-as	much	as
there	is	always	the	chance	of	an	accident,	even	on	the	royal	roads.	Although
they	may	be	very	carefully	maintained,	no	one	can	guarantee	that	there	will	be
no	danger	even	on	the	safest	road.	The	sense	enjoyment	spirit	has	been	current
a	very	long,	long	time,	owing	to	material	association.	Therefore,	in	spite	of
regulated	sense	enjoyment,	there	is	every	chance	of	falling	down;	therefore
any	attachment	for	regulated	sense	enjoyment	must	also	be	avoided	by	all
means.	But	action	in	the	loving	service	of	Kṛṣṇa	detaches	one	from	all	kinds
of	sensory	activities.	Therefore,	no	one	should	try	to	be	detached	from	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	at	any	stage	of	life.	The	whole	purpose	of	detachment	from	all
kinds	of	sense	attachment	is	ultimately	to	become	situated	on	the	platform	of
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
TEXT	35
श ् र े य ा ᇳ ᇿ व ध म ो ᆼ
	
ि व ग ु ण ः
	
प र ध म ा ᆼ ᇰ ᇿ व न ु ि ᇾ ठ त ा त ्
	
।
ᇿ व ध म ᆹ
	
ि न ध न ं
	
श ् र े य ः
	
प र ध म ो ᆼ
	
भ य ा व ह ः
	
॥
३ ५
॥
śreyān	sva-dharmo	viguṇaḥpara-dharmāt	svanuṣṭhitāt
sva-dharme	nidhanaṁ	śreyaḥ
para-dharmo	bhayāvahaḥ
śreyān—
far	better;	
sva-dharmaḥ—
one's	prescribed	duties;	
viguṇaḥ—
even
faulty;	
para-dharmāt—
from	duties	mentioned	for	others;	
svanuṣṭhitāt—
than
perfectly	done;	
sva-dharme—
in	one's	prescribed	duties;	
nidhanam—
destruction;	
śreyaḥ—
better;	
para-dharmaḥ—
duties	prescribed	for	others;
bhaya-āvahaḥ—
dangerous.
TRANSLATION
It	is	far	better	to	discharge	one's	prescribed	duties,	even	though	they
may	be	faulty,	than	another's	duties.	Destruction	in	the	course	of
performing	one's	own	duty	is	better	than	engaging	in	another's	duties,	for
to	follow	another's	path	is	dangerous.
PURPORT
One	should	therefore	discharge	his	prescribed	duties	in	full	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	rather	than	those	prescribed	for	others.	Prescribed	duties
complement	one's	psychophysical	condition,	under	the	spell	of	the	modes	of
material	nature.	Spiritual	duties	are	as	ordered	by	the	spiritual	master,	for	the
transcendental	service	of	Kṛṣṇa.	But	both	materially	or	spiritually,	one	should
stick	to	his	prescribed	duties	even	up	to	death,	rather	than	imitate	another's
prescribed	duties.	Duties	on	the	spiritual	platform	and	duties	on	the	material
platform	may	be	different,	but	the	principle	of	following	the	authorized
direction	is	always	good	for	the	performer.	When	one	is	under	the	spell	of	the
modes	of	material	nature,	one	should	follow	the	prescribed	rules	for	particular
situations	and	should	not	imitate	others.	For	example,	a	
brāhmaṇa,	
who	is	in
the	mode	of	goodness,	is	nonviolent,	whereas	a	
kṣatriya,	
who	is	in	the	mode
of	passion,	is	allowed	to	be	violent.	As	such,	for	a	
kṣatriya	
it	is	better	to	be
vanquished	following	the	rules	of	violence	than	to	imitate	a	
brāhmaṇa	
who
follows	the	principles	of	nonviolence.	Everyone	has	to	cleanse	his	heart	by	a
gradual	process,	not	abruptly.	However,	when	one	transcends	the	modes	of
material	nature	and	is	fully	situated	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	he	can	perform
anything	and	everything	under	the	direction	of	the	bona	fide	spiritual	master.In	that	complete	stage	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	the	
kṣatriya	
may	act	as	a
brāhmaṇa,	
or	a	
brāhmaṇa	
may	act	as	a	
kṣatriya.	
In	the	transcendental	stage,
the	distinctions	of	the	material	world	do	not	apply.	For	example,	Viśvāmitra
was	originally	a	
kṣatriya,	
but	later	on	he	acted	as	a	
brāhmaṇa,	
whereas
Paraśurāma	was	a	
brāhmaṇa,	
but	later	on	he	acted	as	a	
kṣatriya.	
Being
transcendentally	situated,	they	could	do	so;	but	as	long	as	one	is	on	the
material	platform,	he	must	perform	his	duties	according	to	the	modes	of
material	nature.	At	the	same	time,	he	must	have	a	full	sense	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.
TEXT	36
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
अ थ
	
क े न
	
प ् र य ु ᇧ त ो ऽ य ं
	
प ा प ं
	
च र ि त
	
प ू ኄ ष ः
	
।
अ ि न ᇫ छ ᇳ न ि प
	
व ा ᇾ ण ᆹ य
	
ब ल ा ि द व
	
ि न य ो ि ज त ः
	
॥
३ ६
॥
arjuna	uvāca
atha	kena	prayukto	'yaṁ
pāpaṁ	carati	pūruṣaḥ
anicchann	api	vārṣṇeya
balād	iva	niyojitaḥ
arjunaḥ	uvāca—
Arjuna	said;
	atha—
hereafter;
	kena—
by	what;
	prayuktaḥ—
impelled;	
ayam—
one;
	pāpam—
sins;
	carati—
acts;
	pūruṣaḥ—
a	man;
	anicchan
—	
without	desiring;	
api—
although;	
vārṣṇeya
—O	descendant	of	Vṛṣṇi;	
balāt
—
by	force;	
iva—
as	if;	
niyojitaḥ—
engaged.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	said:	O	descendant	of	Vṛṣṇi,	by	what	is	one	impelled	to	sinful
acts,	even	unwillingly,	as	if	engaged	by	force?
PURPORT
A	living	entity,	as	part	and	parcel	of	the	Supreme,	is	originally	spiritual,
pure,	and	free	from	all	material	contaminations.	Therefore,	by	nature	he	is	notsubjected	to	the	sins	of	the	material	world.	But	when	he	is	in	contact	with	the
material	nature,	he	acts	in	many	sinful	ways	without	hesitation,	and	sometimes
even	against	his	will.	As	such,	Arjuna's	question	to	Kṛṣṇa	is	very	sanguine,	as
to	the	perverted	nature	of	the	living	entities.	Although	the	living	entity
sometimes	does	not	want	to	act	in	sin,	he	is	still	forced	to	act.	Sinful	actions
are	not,	however,	impelled	by	the	Supersoul	within,	but	are	due	to	another
cause,	as	the	Lord	explains	in	the	next	verse.
TEXT	37
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
क ा म
	
ए ष
	
क ् र ो ध
	
ए ष
	
र ज ो ग ु ण स म ु द ् भ व ः
	
।
म ह ा श न ो
	
म ह ा प ा ᇴ म ा
	
ि व ሬ ᆸ ेन ि म ह
	
व ै ि र ण म ्
	
॥
३ ७
॥
śrī-bhagavān	uvāca
kāma	eṣa	krodha	eṣa
rajoguṇa-samudbhavaḥ
mahā-śano	mahā-pāpmā
viddhy	enam	iha	vairiṇam
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
kāmaḥ—
lust;	
eṣaḥ
—all	these;	
krodhaḥ—
wrath;	
eṣaḥ—
all	these;	
rajo-guṇa—
the	mode	of
passion;	
samudbhavaḥ—
born	of;	
mahā-śanaḥ—
all-devouring;	
mahā-pāpmā
—
greatly	sinful;	
viddhi—
know;	
enam—
this;	
iha—
in	the	material	world;
vairiṇam—	
greatest	enemy.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	It	is	lust	only,	Arjuna,	which	is	born	of	contact
with	the	material	modes	of	passion	and	later	transformed	into	wrath,	and
which	is	the	all-devouring,	sinful	enemy	of	this	world.
PURPORT
When	a	living	entity	comes	in	contact	with	the	material	creation,	his	eternal
love	for	Kṛṣṇa	is	transformed	into	lust,	in	association	with	the	mode	ofpassion.	Or,	in	other	words,	the	sense	of	love	of	God	becomes	transformed
into	lust,	as	milk	in	contact	with	sour	tamarind	is	transformed	into	yogurt.
Then	again,	when	lust	is	unsatisfied,	it	turns	into	wrath;	wrath	is	transformed
into	illusion,	and	illusion	continues	the	material	existence.	Therefore,	lust	is
the	greatest	enemy	of	the	living	entity,	and	it	is	lust	only	which	induces	the
pure	living	entity	to	remain	entangled	in	the	material	world.	Wrath	is	the
manifestation	of	the	mode	of	ignorance;	these	modes	exhibit	themselves	as
wrath	and	other	corollaries.	If,	therefore,	the	modes	of	passion,	instead	of
being	degraded	into	the	modes	of	ignorance,	are	elevated	to	the	modes	of
goodness	by	the	prescribed	method	of	Iiving	and	acting,	then	one	can	be	saved
from	the	degradation	of	wrath	by	spiritual	attachment.
The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	expanded	Himself	into	many	for	His
ever-increasing	spiritual	bliss,	and	the	living	entities	are	parts	and	parcels	of
this	spiritual	bliss.	They	also	have	partial	independence,	but	by	misuse	of	their
independence,	when	the	service	attitude	is	transformed	into	the	propensity	for
sense	enjoyment,	they	come	under	the	sway	of	lust.	This	material	creation	is
created	by	the	Lord	to	give	a	facility	to	the	conditioned	souls	to	fulfill	these
lustful	propensities,	and	when	they	are	completely	baffled	by	prolonged
lustful	activities,	the	living	entities	begin	to	inquire	about	their	real	position.
This	inquiry	is	the	beginning	of	the	
Vedānta-sūtras,	
wherein	it	is	said,
athāto	brahma-jijñāsā:	
one	should	inquire	into	the	Supreme.	And	the
Supreme	is	defined	in	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
as	
janmādyasya	yato	'nvayād
itarataś	ca,	
or,	"The	origin	of	everything	is	the	Supreme	Brahman."	Therefore,
the	origin	of	lust	is	also	in	the	Supreme.	If,	therefore,	lust	is	transformed	into
love	for	the	Supreme,	or	transformed	into	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness–or,	in	other
words,	desiring	everything	for	Kṛṣṇa–then	bothlust	and	wrath	can	be
spiritualized.	Hanumān,	the	great	servitor	of	Lord	Rama,	engaged	his	wrath
upon	his	enemies	for	the	satisfaction	of	the	Lord.	Therefore,	lust	and	wrath,
when	they	are	employed	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	become	our	friends	instead
of	our	enemies.
TEXT	38
ध ू म े न ा ि व ् र य त े
	
व ह ् ि न य ᆼ थ ा द श ो ᆼ
	
म ल े न
	
च
	
।
य थ ो ᇺ ब े न ा व ृ त ो
	
ग भ ᆼ ᇿ त थ ा
	
त े न े द म ा व ृ त म ्
	
॥
३ ८
॥
dhūmenāvriyate	vahnir
yathādarśo	malena	cayatholbenāvṛto	garbhas
tathā	tenedam	āvṛtam
dhūmena—
by	smoke;	
āvriyate—
covered;	
vahniḥ—
fire;	
yathā—
just	as;
ādarśaḥ—
mirror;	
malena—
by	dust;	
ca—
also;	
yathā—
just	as;	
ulbena—
by	the
womb;	
āvṛtaḥ—
is	covered;	
garbhaḥ—
embryo;	
tathā-so;	tena—
by	that	lust;
idam—
this;	
āvṛtam—
is	covered.
TRANSLATION
As	fire	is	covered	by	smoke,	as	a	mirror	is	covered	by	dust,	or	as	the
embryo	is	covered	by	the	womb,	similarly,	the	living	entity	is	covered	by
different	degrees	of	this	lust.
PURPORT
There	are	three	degrees	of	covering	of	the	living	entity	by	which	his	pure
consciousness	is	obscured.	This	covering	is	but	lust	under	different
manifestations	like	smoke	in	the	fire,	dust	on	the	mirror,	and	the	womb	about
the	embryo.	When	lust	is	compared	to	smoke,	it	is	understood	that	the	fire	of
the	living	spark	can	be	a	little	perceived.	In	other	words,	when	the	living
entity	exhibits	his	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	slightly,	he	may	be	likened	to	the	fire
covered	by	smoke.	Although	fire	is	necessary	where	there	is	smoke,	there	is
no	overt	manifestation	of	fire	in	the	early	stage.	This	stage	is	like	the
beginning	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	The	dust	on	the	mirror	refers	to	a	cleansing
process	of	the	mirror	of	the	mind	by	so	many	spiritual	methods.	The	best
process	is	to	chant	the	holy	names	of	the	Lord.	The	embryo	covered	by	the
womb	is	an	analogy	illustrating	a	helpless	position,	for	the	child	in	the	womb
is	so	helpless	that	he	cannot	even	move.	This	stage	of	living	condition	can	be
compared	to	that	of	the	trees.	The	trees	are	also	living	entities,	but	they	have
been	put	in	such	a	condition	of	life	by	such	a	great	exhibition	of	lust	that	they
are	almost	void	of	all	consciousness.	The	covered	mirror	is	compared	to	the
birds	and	beasts,	and	the	smoke	covered	fire	is	compared	to	the	human	being.
In	the	form	of	a	human	being,	the	living	entity	may	revive	a	little	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	and,	if	he	makes	further	development,	the	fire	of	spiritual	life
can	be	kindled	in	the	human	form	of	life.	By	careful	handling	of	the	smoke	in
the	fire,	the	fire	can	be	made	to	blaze.	Therefore	the	human	form	of	life	is	achance	for	the	living	entity	to	escape	the	entanglement	of	material	existence.
In	the	human	form	of	life,	one	can	conquer	the	enemy,	lust,	by	cultivation	of
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	under	able	guidance.
TEXT	39
आ व ृ त ं
	
ᇥ ा न म े त े न
	
ᇥ ा ि न न ो
	
ि न ᇰ य व ै ि र ण ा
	
।
क ा म ኅ प े ण
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
द ु ᇾ प ू र े ण ा न ल े न
	
च
	
॥
३ ९
॥
āvṛtaṁ	jñānam	etena
jñānino	nitya-vairiṇā
kāma-rūpeṇa	kaunteya
duṣpūreṇānalena	ca
āvṛtam—
covered;	
jñānam—
pure	consciousness;	
etena—
by	this;	
jñāninaḥ—
of	the	knower;	
nitya-vairiṇā—
eternal	enemy;	
kāma-rūpeṇa—
in	the	form	of
lust;	
kaunteya—
O	son	of	Kuntī;	
duṣpūreṇa—
never	to	be	satisfied;	
analena—
by	the	fire;	
ca—
also.
TRANSLATION
Thus,	a	man's	pure	consciousness	is	covered	by	his	eternal	enemy	in	the
form	of	lust,	which	is	never	satisfied	and	which	burns	like	fire.
PURPORT
It	is	said	in	the	
Manu-smṛti	
that	lust	cannot	be	satisfied	by	any	amount	of
sense	enjoyment,	just	as	fire	is	never	extinguished	by	a	constant	supply	of
fuel.	In	the	material	world,	the	center	of	all	activities	is	sex,	and	thus	this
material	world	is	called	
maithuṇya-āgāra,	
or	the	shackles	of	sex	life.	In	the
ordinary	prison	house,	criminals	are	kept	within	bars;	similarly,	the	criminals
who	are	disobedient	to	the	laws	of	the	Lord	are	shackled	by	sex	life.
Advancement	of	material	civilization	on	the	basis	of	sense	gratification	means
increasing	the	duration	of	the	material	existence	of	a	living	entity.	Therefore,
this	lust	is	the	symbol	of	ignorance	by	which	the	living	entity	is	kept	within
the	material	world.	While	one	enjoys	sense	gratification,	it	may	be	that	there	issome	feeling	of	happiness,	but	actually	that	so-called	feeling	of	happiness	is
the	ultimate	enemy	of	the	sense	enjoyer.
TEXT	40
इ ि ᇳ द ् र य ा ि ण
	
म न ो
	
ब ु द ् ि ध र ᇿ य ा ि ध ᇾ ठ ा न म ु ᇫ य त े
	
।
ए त ै ि व ᆼ म ो ह य ᇰ य े ष
	
ᇥ ा न म ा व ृ ᇰ य
	
द े ि ह न म ्
	
॥
४ ०
॥
indriyāṇi	mano	buddhir
asyādhiṣṭhānam	ucyate
etair	vimohayaty	eṣa
jñānam	āvṛtya	dehinam
indriyāṇi—
the	senses;	
manaḥ—
the	mind;	
buddhiḥ—
the	intelligence;	
asya
—of	the	lust;	
adhiṣṭhānam—
sitting	place;	
ucyate—
called;	
etaiḥ—
by	all	these;
vimohayati—
bewilders;	
eṣaḥ—
of	this;	
jñānam—
knowledge;	
āvṛtya
—
covering;	
dehinam—
the	embodied.
TRANSLATION
The	senses,	the	mind	and	the	intelligence	are	the	sitting	places	of	this
lust,	which	veils	the	real	knowledge	of	the	living	entity	and	bewilders	him.
PURPORT
The	enemy	has	captured	different	strategic	positions	in	the	body	of	the
conditioned	soul,	and	therefore	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	giving	hints	of	those	places,	so
that	one	who	wants	to	conquer	the	enemy	may	know	where	he	can	be	found.
Mind	is	the	center	of	all	the	activities	of	the	senses,	and	thus	the	mind	is	the
reservoir	of	all	ideas	of	sense	gratification;	and,	as	a	result,	the	mind	and	the
senses	become	the	repositories	of	lust.	Next,	the	intelligence	department
becomes	the	capital	of	such	lustful	propensities.	Intelligence	is	the	immediate
next-door	neighbor	of	the	spirit	soul.	Lusty	intelligence	influences	the	spirit
soul	to	acquire	the	false	ego	and	identify	itself	with	matter,	and	thus	with	the
mind	and	senses.	The	spirit	soul	becomes	addicted	to	enjoying	the	material
senses	and	mistakes	this	as	true	happiness.	This	false	identification	of	thespirit	soul	is	very	nicely	explained	in	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:
yasyātma-buddhiḥ	kuṇāpe	tri-dhātuke
sva-dhīḥ	kalatrādiṣu	bhauma	idyadhīḥ
yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ	salite	na	karhicij
janeṣv	abhijñeṣu	sa	eva	gokharaḥ.
"A	human	being	who	identifies	this	body	made	of	three	elements	with	his	self,
who	considers	the	by-products	of	the	body	to	be	his	kinsmen,	who	considers
the	land	of	birth	as	worshipable,	and	who	goes	to	the	place	of	pilgrimage
simply	to	take	a	bath	rather	than	meet	men	of	transcendental	knowledge	there,
is	to	be	considered	as	an	ass	or	a	cow."
TEXT	41
त ᇿ म ा ᇰ ᇰ व ि म ि ᇳ द ् र य ा ᇯ य ा द ौ
	
ि न य ᇸ य
	
भ र त ष ᆼ भ
	
।
प ा ᇴ म ा न ं
	
प ् र ज ि ह
	
ቋ े न ं
	
ᇥ ा न ि व ᇥ ा न न ा श न म ्
	
॥
४ १
॥
tasmāt	tvam	indriyāṇy	ādau
niyamya	bharatarṣabha
pāpmānaṁ	prajahi	hy	enaṁ
jñāna-vijñāna-nāśanam
tasmāt—
therefore;	
tvam-you;	indriyāṇi—
senses;	
ādau—
in	the	beginning;
niyamya—
by	regulating;	
bharatarṣabha
—O	chief	amongst	the	descendants	of
Bharata;	
pāpmānam—
the	great	symbol	of	sin;	
prajahi—
curb;	
hi—
certain
ly;
enam—
this;	
jñāna—
knowledge;	
vijñāna—
scientific	knowledge	of	the	pure
soul;	
nāśanam—
destroyer.
TRANSLATION
Therefore,	O	Arjuna,	best	of	the	Bhāratas,	in	the	very	beginning	curb
this	great	symbol	of	sin	[lust]	by	regulating	the	senses,	and	slay	this
destroyer	of	knowledge	and	self-realization.
PURPORTThe	Lord	advised	Arjuna	to	regulate	the	senses	from	the	very	beginning	so
that	he	could	curb	the	greatest	sinful	enemy,	lust,	which	destroys	the	urge	for
self-realization,	and	specifically,	knowledge	of	the	self.	
Jñānam	
refers	to
knowledge	of	self	as	distinguished	from	non-self,	or,	in	other	words,
knowledge	that	the	spirit	soul	is	not	the	body.	
Vijñānam	
refers	to	specific
knowledge	of	the	spirit	soul	and	knowledge	of	one's	constitutional	position
and	his	relationship	to	the	Supreme	Soul.	It	is	explained	thus	in	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam:	jñānaṁ	parama-guhyaṁ	me	yad-vijñāna-	samanvitam	/
sarahasyaṁ	tad-aṅgaṁ	ca	gṛhāna	gaditaṁ	mayā:	
"The	knowledge	of	the	self
and	the	Supreme	Self	is	very	confidential	and	mysterious,	being	veiled	by
māyā
,	but	such	knowledge	and	specific	realization	can	be	understood	if	it	is
explained	by	the	Lord	Himself."	
Bhagavad-gītā	
gives	us	that	knowledge,
specifically	knowledge	of	the	self.	The	living	entities	are	parts	and	parcels	of
the	Lord,	and	therefore	they	are	simply	meant	to	serve	the	Lord.	This
consciousness	is	called	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	So,	from	the	very	beginning	of
life	one	has	to	learn	this	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	and	thereby	one	may	become
fully	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	and	act	accordingly.
Lust	is	only	the	perverted	reflection	of	the	love	of	God	which	is	natural	for
every	living	entity.	But	if	one	is	educated	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	from	the
very	beginning,	that	natural	love	of	God	cannot	deteriorate	into	lust.	When
love	of	God	deteriorates	into	lust,	it	is	very	difficult	to	return	to	the	normal
condition.	Nonetheless,	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	so	powerful	that	even	a	late
beginner	can	become	a	lover	of	God	by	following	the	regulative	principles	of
devotional	service.	So,	from	any	stage	of	life,	or	from	the	time	of
understanding	its	urgency,	one	can	begin	regulating	the	senses	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	devotional	service	of	the	Lord,	and	turn	the	lust	into	love	of
Godhead
—
the	highest	perfectional	stage	of	human	life.
TEXT	42
इ ि ᇳ द ् र य ा ि ण
	
प र ा ᇯ य ा ह ु ि र ि ᇳ द ् र य े ᇷ य ः
	
प र ं
	
म न ः
	
।
म न स ᇿ त ु
	
प र ा
	
ब ु द ् ि ध य ो ᆼ
	
ब ु ሬ े ः
	
प र त ᇿ त ु
	
स ः
	
॥
४ २
॥
indriyāṇi	parāṇy	āhur
indriyebhyaḥ	paraṁ	manaḥ
manasas	tu	parā	buddhir
yo	buddheḥ	paratas	tu	saḥindriyāṇī—
senses;	
parāṇi—
superior;	
āhuḥ—
is	said;	
indriyebhyaḥ—
more
than	the	senses;	
param—
superior;	
manaḥ—
the	mind;	
manasaḥ—
more	than	the
mind;	
tu—
also;	
parā—
superior;	
buddhiḥ—
intelligence;	
yaḥ—
one	which;
buddheḥ—
more	than	the	intelligence;	
parataḥ—
superior;	
tu—
but;	
saḥ—
he.
TRANSLATION
The	working	senses	are	superior	to	dull	matter;	mind	is	higher	than	the
senses;	intelligence	is	still	higher	than	the	mind;	and	he	[the	soul]	is	even
higher	than	the	intelligence.
PURPORT
The	senses	are	different	outlets	for	the	activities	of	lust.	Lust	is	reserved
within	the	body,	but	it	is	given	vent	through	the	senses.	Therefore,	the	senses
are	superior	to	the	body	as	a	whole.	These	outlets	are	not	in	use	when	there	is
superior	consciousness,	or	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	In	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	the
soul	makes	direct	connection	with	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead;
therefore	the	bodily	functions,	as	described	here,	ultimately	end	in	the
Supreme	Soul.	Bodily	action	means	the	functions	of	the	senses,	and	stopping
the	senses	means	stopping	all	bodily	actions.	But	since	the	mind	is	active,
then,	even	though	the	body	may	be	silent	and	at	rest,	the	mind	will	act
—
as	it
does	during	dreaming.	But,	above	the	mind	there	is	the	determination	of	the
intelligence,	and	above	the	intelligence	is	the	soul	proper.	If,	therefore,	the
soul	is	directly	engaged	with	the	Supreme,	naturally	all	other	subordinates,
namely,	the	intelligence,	mind	and	the	senses,	will	be	automatically	engaged.
In	the	
Kaṭha	Upaniṣad	
there	is	a	passage	in	which	it	is	said	that	the	objects	of
sense	gratification	are	superior	to	the	senses,	and	mind	is	superior	to	the	sense
objects.	If,	therefore,	the	mind	is	directly	engaged	in	the	service	of	the	Lord
constantly,	then	there	is	no	chance	of	the	senses	becoming	engaged	in	other
ways.	This	mental	attitude	has	already	been	explained.	If	the	mind	is	engaged
in	the	transcendental	service	of	the	Lord,	there	is	no	chance	of	its	being
engaged	in	the	lower	propensities.	In	the	
Kaṭha	Upaniṣad	
the	soul	has	been
described	as	
mahān,	
the	great.	Therefore	the	soul	is	above	all
—
namely,	the
sense	objects,	the	senses,	the	mind	and	the	intelligence.	Therefore,	directly
understanding	the	constitutional	position	of	the	soul	is	the	solution	of	the
whole	problem.With	intelligence	one	has	to	seek	out	the	constitutional	position	of	the	soul
and	then	engage	the	mind	always	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	That	solves	the
whole	problem.	A	neophyte	spiritualist	is	generally	advised	to	keep	aloof	from
the	objects	of	senses.	One	has	to	strengthen	the	mind	by	use	of	intelligence.	If
by	intelligence	one	engages	one's	mind	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	by	complete
surrender	unto	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	then,	automatically,	the
mind	becomes	stronger,	and	even	though	the	senses	are	very	strong,	like
serpents,	they	will	be	no	more	effective	than	serpents	with	broken	fangs.	But
even	though	the	soul	is	the	master	of	intelligence	and	mind,	and	the	senses
also,	still,	unless	it	is	strengthened	by	association	with	Kṛṣṇa	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	there	is	every	chance	of	falling	down	due	to	the	agitated	mind.
TEXT	43
ए व ं
	
ब ु ሬ े ः
	
प र ं
	
ब ु द ् ᇲ व ा
	
स ं ᇿ त ᇷ य ा ᇰ म ा न म ा ᇰ म न ा
	
।
ज ि ह
	
श त ्ኄ ं
	
म ह ा ब ा ह ो
	
क ा म ኅ प ं
	
द ु र ा स द म ्
	
॥
४ ३
॥
evaṁ	buddheḥ	paraṁ	buddhvā
saṁstabhyātmānam	ātmanā
jahi	śatruṁ	mahā-bāho
kāma-rūpaṁ	durāsadam
evam—
thus;	
buddheḥ—
of	intelligence;	
param—
superior;	
buddhvā—
so
knowing;	
saṁstabhya—
by	steadying;	
ātmānam—
the	mind;	
ātmanā—
by
deliberate	intelligence;	
jahi—
conquer;	
śatrum—
the	enemy;	
mahā-bāho—
O
mighty-armed	one;	
kāma-rūpam—
the	form	of	lust;	
durāsadam—
formidable.
TRANSLATION
Thus	knowing	oneself	to	be	transcendental	to	material	senses,	mind
and	intelligence,	one	should	control	the	lower	self	by	the	higher	self	and
thus—	by	spiritual	strength—conquer	this	insatiable	enemy	known	as
lust.
PURPORTThis	Third	Chapter	of	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
is	conclusively	directive	to	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	by	knowing	oneself	as	the	eternal	servitor	of	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	without	considering	impersonal	voidness	as	the
ultimate	end.	In	the	material	existence	of	life,	one	is	certainly	influenced	by
propensities	for	lust	and	desire	for	dominating	the	resources	of	material
nature.	Desire	for	overlording	and	sense	gratification	are	the	greatest	enemies
of	the	conditioned	soul;	but	by	the	strength	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	one	can
control	the	material	senses,	the	mind	and	the	intelligence.	One	may	not	give
up	work	and	prescribed	duties	all	of	a	sudden;	but	by	gradually	developing
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	one	can	be	situated	in	a	transcendental	position	without
being	influenced	by	the	material	senses	and	the	mind–by	steady	intelligence
directed	toward	one's	pure	identity.	This	is	the	sum	total	of	this	chapter.	In	the
immature	stage	of	material	existence,	philosophical	speculations	and	artificial
attempts	to	control	the	senses	by	the	so-called	practice	of	yogic	postures	can
never	help	a	man	toward	spiritual	life.	He	must	be	trained	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	by	higher	intelligence.
Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	Third	Chapter	of	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhagavad-gītā
	in	the	matter	of	Karma-yoga,	or	the	Discharge	of	One's
Prescribed	Duty	in	Kṛṣṇa	Consciousness.Chapter-4
CHAPTER	FOUR
Transcendental	Knowledge
TEXT	1
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
इ म ं
	
ि व व ᇿ व त े
	
य ो ग ं
	
प ् र ो ᇧ त व ा न ह म ᇼ य य म ्
	
।
	
ि व व ᇿ व ा ᇳ म न व े
	
प ् र ा ह
	
म न ु ि र ቎ व ा क व े ऽ ब ् र व ी त ्
	
॥
१
॥
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
imaṁ	vivasvate	yogaṁ
proktavān	aham	avyayam
vivasvān	manave	prāhamanur	ikṣvākave	'bravīt
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
imam—
this;	
vivasvate—
unto	the	sun-god;
	yogam—
the	science	of	one's	relationship	to
the	Supreme;	
proktavān—
instructed;	
aham—
I;
	avyayam—
imperishable;
vivasvān—
Vivasvān	(the	sun-god's	name);	
manave—
unto	the	father	of
mankind	(of	the	name	Vaivasvata);	
prāha—
told;	
manuḥ—
the	father	of
mankind;	
ikṣvākave—
unto	King	Ikṣvāku;	
abravīt—
said.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	I	instructed	this	imperishable	science	of	yoga	to
the	sun-god,	Vivasvān,	and	Vivasvān	instructed	it	to	Manu,	the	father	of
mankind,	and	Manu	in	turn	instructed	it	to	Ikṣvāku.
PURPORT
Herein	we	find	the	history	of	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
traced	from	a	remote	time
when	it	was	delivered	to	the	royal	order,	the	kings	of	all	planets.	This	science
is	especially	meant	for	the	protection	of	the	inhabitants,	and	therefore	the
royal	order	should	understand	it	in	order	to	be	able	to	rule	the	citizens	and
protect	them	from	the	material	bondage	to	lust.	Human	life	is	meant	for
cultivation	of	spiritual	knowledge,	in	eternal	relationship	with	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	and	the	executive	heads	of	all	states	and	all	planets
are	obliged	to	impart	this	lesson	to	the	citizens	by	education,	culture	and
devotion.	In	other	words,	the	executive	heads	of	all	states	are	intended	to
spread	the	science	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	so	that	the	people	may	take
advantage	of	this	great	science	and	pursue	a	successful	path,	utilizing	the
opportunity	of	the	human	form	of	life.
In	this	millennium,	the	sun-god	is	known	as	Vivasvān,	the	king	of	the	sun,
which	is	the	origin	of	all	planets	within	the	solar	system.	In	the	
Brahma-
saṁhitā	
it	is	stated:
yac-cakṣur	eṣa	savitā	sakala-grahāṇāṁ
rājā	samasta-sura-mūrttir	aśeṣa-tejāḥ
yasyājñayā	bhramati	sambhṛta-kālacakro
govindam	ādi-puruṣaṁ	tam	ahaṁ	bhajāmi"Let	me	worship,"	Lord	Brahmā	said,	"the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
Govinda	[Kṛṣṇa],	who	is	the	original	person	and	under	whose	order	the	sun,
which	is	the	king	of	all	planets,	is	assuming	immense	power	and	heat.	The	sun
represents	the	eye	of	the	Lord	and	traverses	its	orbit	in	obedience	to	His
order."
The	sun	is	the	king	of	the	planets,	and	the	sun-god	(at	present	of	the	name
Vivasvān)	rules	the	sun	planet,	which	is	controlling	all	other	planets	by
supplying	heat	and	light.	He	is	rotating	under	the	order	of	Kṛṣṇa,	and	Lord
Kṛṣṇa	originally	made	Vivasvān	His	first	disciple	to	understand	the	science	of
Bhagavad-gītā.	
The	
Gītā
	is	not,	therefore,	a	speculative	treatise	for	the
insignificant	mundane	scholar	but	is	a	standard	book	of	knowledge	coming
down	from	time	immemorial.	In	the	
Mahābhārata	(Śānti-parva	
348.51-52)	we
can	trace	out	the	history	of	the	
Gītā	
as	follows:
tretā-yugādau	ca	tato	vivasvān	manave	dadau
manuś	ca	loka-bhṛty-arthaṁ	sutāyekṣvākave	dadau
ikṣvākuṇā	ca	kathito	vyāpya	lokān	avasthitāḥ
"In	the	beginning	of	the	Tretā-yuga	[millennium]	this	science	of	the
relationship	with	the	Supreme	was	delivered	by	Vivasvān	to	Manu.	Manu,
being	the	father	of	mankind,	gave	it	to	his	son	Mahārāja	Ikṣvāku,	the	King	of
this	earth	planet	and	forefather	of	the	Raghu	dynasty	in	which	Lord
Rāmacandra	appeared.	Therefore,	
Bhagavad-gītā	
existed	in	the	human	society
from	the	time	of	Mahārāja	Ikṣvāku."
At	the	present	moment	we	have	just	passed	through	five	thousand	years	of
the	Kali-yuga,	which	lasts	432,000	years.	Before	this	there	was	Dvāpara-	yuga
(800,000	years),	and	before	that	there	was	Tretā-yuga	(1,200,000	years).	Thus,
some	2,005,000	years	ago,	Manu	spoke	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
to	his	disciple	and
son	Mahārāja	lkṣvāku,	the	King	of	this	planet	earth.	The	age	of	the	current
Manu	is	calculated	to	last	some	305,300,000	years,	of	which	120,400,000
have	passed.	Accepting	that	before	the	birth	of	Manu,	the	
Gītā	
was	spoken	by
the	Lord	to	His	disciple,	the	sun-god	Vivasvān,	a	rough	estimate	is	that	the
Gītā	
was	spoken	at	least	120,400,000	years	ago;	and	in	human	society	it	has
been	extant	for	two	million	years.	It	was	respoken	by	the	Lord	again	to	Arjuna
about	five	thousand	years	ago.	That	is	the	rough	estimate	of	the	history	of	the
Gīta,	
according	to	the	
Gītā	
itself	and	according	to	the	version	of	the	speaker,
Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.	It	was	spoken	to	the	sun-god	Vivasvān	because	he	is	also	a
kṣatriya	
and	is	the	father	of	all	
kṣatriyas	
who	are	descendants	of	the	sun-god,
or	the	
sūrya-vaṁśa	kṣatriyas.	
Because	
Bhagavad-gītā
	is	as	good	as	the	
Vedas,being	spoken	by	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	this	knowledge	is
apauruṣeya,	
superhuman.	Since	the	Vedic	instructions	are	accepted	as	they
are,	without	human	interpretation,	the	
Gītā
	must	therefore	be	accepted	without
mundane	interpretation.	The	mundane	wranglers	may	speculate	on	the	
Gītā
	in
their	own	ways,	but	that	is	not	
Bhagavad-gītā	
as	it	is.	Therefore,	
Bhagavad-
gītā	
has	to	be	accepted	as	it	is,	from	the	disciplic	succession,	and	it	is
described	herein	that	the	Lord	spoke	to	the	sun-god,	the	sun-god	spoke	to	his
son	Manu,	and	Manu	spoke	to	his	son	Ikṣvāku.
TEXT	2
ए व ं
	
प र ᇸ प र ा प ् र ा ᇴ त ि म म ं
	
र ा ज ष ᆼ य ो
	
ि व द ु ः
	
।
स
	
क ा ल े न े ह
	
म ह त ा
	
य ो ग ो
	
न ᇾ ट ः
	
प र ᇳ त प
	
॥
२
॥
evaṁ	paramparā-prāptam
imaṁ	rājarṣayo	viduḥ
sa	kāleneha	mahatā
yogo	naṣṭaḥ	parantapa
evam—
thus;	
paramparā—
disciplic	succession;	
prāptam—
received;	
imam—
this	science;	
rājarṣayaḥ—
the	saintly	kings;	
viduḥ—
understood;	
saḥ—
that
knowledge;	
kālena—
in	the	course	of	time;	
iha—
in	this	world;	
mahatā—
by
great;	
yogaḥ—
the	science	of	one's	relationship	with	the	Supreme;	
naṣṭaḥ—
scattered;	
parantapa—
O	Arjuna,	subduer	of	the	enemies.
TRANSLATION
This	supreme	science	was	thus	received	through	the	chain	of	disciplic
succession,	and	the	saintly	kings	understood	it	in	that	way.	But	in	course
of	time	the	succession	was	broken,	and	therefore	the	science	as	it	is
appears	to	be	lost.
PURPORT
It	is	clearly	stated	that	the	
Gītā
	was	especially	meant	for	the	saintly	kings
because	they	were	to	execute	its	purpose	in	ruling	over	the	citizens.	CertainlyBhagavad-gītā	
was	never	meant	for	the	demonic	persons,	who	would	dissipate
its	value	for	no	one's	benefit	and	would	devise	all	types	of	interpretations
according	to	personal	whims.	As	soon	as	the	original	purpose	was	scattered	by
the	motives	of	the	unscrupulous	commentators,	there	arose	the	need	to
reestablish	the	disciplic	succession.	Five	thousand	years	ago	it	was	detected
by	the	Lord	Himself	that	the	disciplic	succession	was	broken,	and	therefore
He	declared	that	the	purpose	of	the	
Gītā
	appeared	to	be	lost.	In	the	same	way,
at	the	present	moment	also	there	are	so	many	editions	of	the	
Gītā
	(especially
in	English),	but	almost	all	of	them	are	not	according	to	authorized	disciplic
succession.	There	are	innumerable	interpretations	rendered	by	different
mundane	scholars,	but	almost	all	of	them	do	not	accept	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	although	they	make	a	good	business	on	the
words	of	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.	This	spirit	is	demonic,	because	demons	do	not	believe	in
God	but	simply	enjoy	the	property	of	the	Supreme.	Since	there	is	a	great	need
of	an	edition	of	the	
Gītā	
in	English,	as	it	is	received	by	the	
paramparā
(disciplic	succession)	system,	an	attempt	is	made	herewith	to	fulfill	this	great
want.	
Bhagavad-gītā
–accepted	as	it	is–is	a	great	boon	to	humanity;	but	if	it	is
accepted	as	a	treatise	of	philosophical	speculations,	it	is	simply	a	waste	of
time.
TEXT	3
स
	
ए व ा य ं
	
म य ा
	
त े ऽ ሱ
	
य ो ग ः
	
प ् र ो ᇧ त ः
	
प ु र ा त न ः
	
।
भ ᇧ त ो ऽ ि स
	
म े
	
स ख ा
	
च े ि त
	
र ह ᇿ य ं
	
ቋ े त द ु ሧ म म ्
	
॥
३
॥
sa	evāyaṁ	mayā	te	'dya
yogaḥ	proktaḥ	purātanaḥ
bhakto	'si	me	sakhā	ceti
rahasyaṁ	hy	etad	uttamam
saḥ—
the	same	ancient;	
eva—
certainly;	
ayam—
this;	
mayā—
by	Me;	
te—
unto
you;	
adya—
today;	
yogaḥ—
the	science	of	
yoga;	proktaḥ—
spoken;	
purātanaḥ
—
very	old;	
bhaktaḥ—
devotee;	
asi—
you	are;	
me—
My;
	sakhā—	
friend;	
ca
—
also;	
iti—
therefore;	
rahasyam—
mystery;	
hi—
certainly;	
etat—
this;	
uttamam
—
transcendental.
TRANSLATIONThat	very	ancient	science	of	the	relationship	with	the	Supreme	is	today
told	by	Me	to	you	because	you	are	My	devotee	as	well	as	My	friend;
therefore	you	can	understand	the	transcendental	mystery	of	this	science.
PURPORT
There	are	two	classes	of	men,	namely	the	devotee	and	the	demon.	The	Lord
selected	Arjuna	as	the	recipient	of	this	great	science	owing	to	his	becoming
the	devotee	of	the	Lord,	but	for	the	demon	it	is	not	possible	to	understand	this
great	mysterious	science.	There	are	a	number	of	editions	of	this	great	book	of
knowledge,	and	some	of	them	have	commentaries	by	the	devotees,	and	some
of	them	have	commentaries	by	the	demons.	Commentation	by	the	devotees	is
real,	whereas	that	of	the	demons	is	useless.	Arjuna	accepts	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	as	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	and	any	commentary	on	the	
Gītā
	following
in	the	footsteps	of	Arjuna	is	real	devotional	service	to	the	cause	of	this	great
science.	The	demonic,	however,	concoct	something	about	Kṛṣṇa	and	mislead
the	public	and	general	readers	from	the	path	of	Kṛṣṇa's	instructions.	One
should	try	to	follow	the	disciplic	succession	from	Arjuna,	and	thus	be
benefitted.
TEXT	4
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
अ प र ं
	
भ व त ो
	
ज ᇳ म
	
प र ं
	
ज ᇳ म
	
ि व व ᇿ व त ः
	
।
क थ म े त द ् ि व ज ा न ी य ा ं
	
ᇰ व म ा द ौ
	
प ् र ो ᇧ त व ा ि न ि त
	
॥
४
॥
arjuna	uvāca
aparaṁ	bhavato	janma
paraṁ	janma	vivasvataḥ
katham	etad	vijānīyāṁ
tvam	ādau	proktavān	iti
arjunaḥ	uvāca—
Arjuna	said;	
aparam—
junior;	
bhavataḥ—
Your;	
janma—
birth;	
param—
superior;	
janma—
birth;	
vivasvataḥ—
of	the	sun-god;	
katham—
how;	
etat—
this;	
vijānīyām—
shall	I	understand;	
tvam—
You;
	ādau—
in	the
beginning;	
proktavān—
instructed;	
iti—
thus.TRANSLATION
Arjuna	said:	The	sun-god	Vivasvān	is	senior	by	birth	to	You.	How	am	I
to	understand	that	in	the	beginning	You	instructed	this	science	to	him?
PURPORT
Arjuna	is	an	accepted	devotee	of	the	Lord,	so	how	could	he	not	believe
Kṛṣṇa's	words?	The	fact	is	that	Arjuna	is	not	inquiring	for	himself	but	for
those	who	do	not	believe	in	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	or	for	the
demons	who	do	not	like	the	idea	that	Kṛṣṇa	should	be	accepted	as	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead;	for	them	only	Arjuna	inquires	on	this	point,
as	if	he	were	himself	not	aware	of	the	Personality	of	Godhead,	or	Kṛṣṇa.	As	it
will	be	evident	from	the	Tenth	Chapter,	Arjuna	knew	perfectly	well	that	Kṛṣṇa
is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	the	fountainhead	of	everything	and
the	last	word	in	Transcendence.	Of	course,	Kṛṣṇa	also	appeared	as	the	son	of
Devakī	on	this	earth.	How	Kṛṣṇa	remained	the	same	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead,	the	eternal,	original	person,	is	very	difficult	for	an	ordinary	man	to
understand.	Therefore,	to	clarify	this	point,	Arjuna	put	this	question	before
Kṛṣṇa	so	that	He	Himself	could	speak	authoritatively.	That	Kṛṣṇa	is	the
supreme	authority	is	accepted	by	the	whole	world,	not	only	at	present,	but
from	time	immemorial,	and	the	demons	alone	reject	Him.	Anyway,	since
Kṛṣṇa	is	the	authority	accepted	by	all,	Arjuna	put	this	question	before	Him	in
order	that	Kṛṣṇa	would	describe	Himself	without	being	depicted	by	the
demons	who	always	try	to	distort	Him	in	a	way	understandable	to	the	demons
and	their	followers.	It	is	necessary	that	everyone,	for	his	own	interest,	know
the	science	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Therefore,	when	Kṛṣṇa	Himself	speaks	about	Himself,	it
is	auspicious	for	all	the	worlds.	To	the	demons,	such	explanations	by	Kṛṣṇa
Himself	may	appear	to	be	strange	because	the	demons	always	study	Kṛṣṇa
from	their	own	standpoint,	but	those	who	are	devotees	heartily	welcome	the
statements	of	Kṛṣṇa	when	they	are	spoken	by	Kṛṣṇa	Himself.	The	devotees
will	always	worship	such	authoritative	statements	of	Kṛṣṇa	because	they	are
always	eager	to	know	more	and	more	about	Him.	The	atheists,	who	consider
Kṛṣṇa	an	ordinary	man,	may	in	this	way	come	to	know	that	Kṛṣṇa	is
superhuman,	that	He	is	
sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha—
the	eternal	form	of	bliss	and
knowledge
—
that	He	is	transcendental,	and	that	He	is	above	the	domination	of
the	modes	of	material	nature	and	above	the	influence	of	time	and	space.	Adevotee	of	Kṛṣṇa's,	like	Arjuna,	is	undoubtedly	above	any	misunderstanding
of	the	transcendental	position	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Arjuna's	putting	this	question	before
the	Lord	is	simply	an	attempt	by	the	devotee	to	defy	the	atheistic	attitude	of
persons	who	consider	Kṛṣṇa	to	be	an	ordinary	human	being	subject	to	the
modes	of	material	nature.
TEXT	5
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
ब ह ू ि न
	
म े
	
ᇼ य त ी त ा ि न
	
ज ᇳ म ा ि न
	
त व
	
च ा ज ु ᆼ न
	
।
त ा ᇳ य ह ं
	
व े द
	
स व ा ᆼ ि ण
	
न
	
ᇰ व ं
	
व े ᇰ थ
	
प र ᇳ त प
	
॥
५
॥
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
bahūni	me	vyatītāni
janmāni	tava	cārjuna
tāny	ahaṁ	veda	sarvāṇi
na	tvaṁ	vettha	parantapa
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
bahūni—
many;	
me
—
of	Mine;	
vyatītāni—
have	passed;	
janmāni—
births;	
tava—
of	yours;	
ca—	
and
also;	
arjuna
—O	Arjuna;	
tāni—
all	those;	
aham—
I;
	veda—
do	know;	
sarvāṇi
—
all;	
na—
not;	
tvam—
yourself;	
vettha—
know;	
parantapa
—O	subduer	of	the
enemy.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	Many,	many	births	both	you	and	I	have	passed.
I	can	remember	all	of	them,	but	you	cannot,	O	subduer	of	the	enemy!
PURPORT
In	the	
Brahma-saṁhitā	
we	have	information	of	many,	many	incarnations	of
the	Lord.	It	is	stated	there:
advaitam	acyutam	anādim	ananta-rūpam
ādyaṁ	purāṇa-puruṣaṁ	nava-yauvanaṁ	cavedeṣu	durllabham	adurllabham	ātma-bhaktau
govindam	ādi-puruṣaṁ	tam	ahaṁ	bhajāmi.
(Bs.	5.33)
"I	worship	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Govinda	[Kṛṣṇa],	who	is
the	original	person–absolute,	infallible,	without	beginning,	although	expanded
into	unlimited	forms,	still	the	same	original,	the	oldest,	and	the	person	always
appearing	as	a	fresh	youth.	Such	eternal,	blissful,	all-	knowing	forms	of	the
Lord	are	usually	understood	by	the	best	Vedic	scholars,	but	they	are	always
manifest	to	pure,	unalloyed	devotees."
It	is	also	stated	in	
Brahma-saṁhitā:
rāmādi	mūrttiṣu	kalā-niyamena	tiṣṭhan
nānāvatāram	akarod	bhuvaneṣu	kintu
kṛṣṇaḥ	svayaṁ	samabhavat	paramaḥ	pumān	yo
govindam	ādi-puruṣaṁ	tam	ahaṁ	bhajāmi
(Bs.	5.39)
"I	worship	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Govinda	[Kṛṣṇa],	who	is
always	situated	in	various	incarnations	such	as	Rāma,	Nṛsiṁha	and	many	sub-
incarnations	as	well,	but	who	is	the	original	Personality	of	Godhead	known	as
Kṛṣṇa,	and	who	incarnates	personally	also."
In	the	
Vedas	
also	it	is	said	that	the	Lord,	although	one	without	a	second,
nevertheless	manifests	Himself	in	innumerable	forms.	He	is	like	the	
vaidurya
stone,	which	changes	color	yet	still	remains	one.	All	those	multi-	forms	are
understood	by	the	pure,	unalloyed	devotees,	but	not	by	a	simple	study	of	the
Vedas:	vedeṣu	durllabham	adurllabham	ātma-bhaktau.	
Devotees	like	Arjuna
are	constant	companions	of	the	Lord,	and	whenever	the	Lord	incarnates,	the
associate	devotees	also	incarnate	in	order	to	serve	the	Lord	in	different
capacities.	Arjuna	is	one	of	these	devotees,	and	in	this	verse	it	is	understood
that	some	millions	of	years	ago	when	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	spoke	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
to
the	sun-god	Vivasvān,	Arjuna,	in	a	different	capacity,	was	also	present.	But
the	difference	between	the	Lord	and	Arjuna	is	that	the	Lord	remembered	the
incidence,	whereas	Arjuna	could	not	remember.	That	is	the	difference	between
the	part	and	parcel	living	entity	and	the	Supreme	Lord.	Although	Arjuna	is
addressed	herein	as	the	mighty	hero	who	could	subdue	the	enemies,	he	is
unable	to	recall	what	had	happened	in	his	various	past	births.	Therefore,	a
living	entity,	however	great	he	may	be	in	the	material	estimation,	can	neverequal	the	Supreme	Lord.	Anyone	who	is	a	constant	companion	of	the	Lord	is
certainly	a	liberated	person,	but	he	cannot	be	equal	to	the	Lord.	The	Lord	is
described	in	the	
Brahma-	saṁhitā	
as	infallible	
(acyuta),	
which	means	that	He
never	forgets	Himself,	even	though	He	is	in	material	contact.	Therefore,	the
Lord	and	the	living	entity	can	never	be	equal	in	all	respects,	even	if	the	living
entity	is	as	liberated	as	Arjuna.	Although	Arjuna	is	a	devotee	of	the	Lord,	he
sometimes	forgets	the	nature	of	the	Lord,	but	by	the	divine	grace	a	devotee
can	at	once	understand	the	infallible	condition	of	the	Lord,	whereas	a
nondevotee	or	a	demon	cannot	understand	this	transcendental	nature.
Consequently	these	descriptions	in	the	
Gītā	
cannot	be	understood	by	demonic
brains.	Kṛṣṇa	remembered	acts	which	were	performed	by	Him	millions	of
years	before,	but	Arjuna	could	not,	despite	the	fact	that	both	Kṛṣṇa	and	Arjuna
are	eternal	in	nature.	We	may	also	note	herein	that	a	living	entity	forgets
everything	due	to	his	change	of	body,	but	the	Lord	remembers	because	He
does	not	change	His	
sac-cid-ānanda	
body.	He	is	
advaita,	
which	means	there	is
no	distinction	between	His	body	and	Himself.	Everything	in	relation	to	Him	is
spirit–whereas	the	conditioned	soul	is	different	from	his	material	body.	And,
because	the	Lord's	body	and	self	are	identical,	His	position	is	always	different
from	the	ordinary	living	entity,	even	when	He	descends	to	the	material
platform.	The	demons	cannot	adjust	themselves	to	this	transcendental	nature
of	the	Lord,	as	the	Lord	explains	in	the	following	verse.
TEXT	6
अ ज ो ऽ ि प
	
स ᇳ न ᇼ य य ा ᇰ म ा
	
भ ू त ा न ा म ी ᇽ व र ो ऽ ि प
	
स न ्
	
।
प ् र क ृ ि त ं
	
ᇿ व ा म ि ध ᇾ ठ ा य
	
स ᇸ भ व ा ᇸ य ा ᇰ म म ा य य ा
	
॥
६
॥
ajo	'pi	sann	avyayātmā
bhūtānām	īśvaro	'pi	san
prakṛtiṁ	svām	adhiṣṭhāya
sambhavāmy	ātma-māyayā
ajaḥ—
unborn;	
api—
although;	
san—
being	so;	
avyaya—
without
deterioration;	
ātmā—
body;	
bhūtānām—
all	those	who	are	born;	
īśvaraḥ—
the
Supreme	Lord;	
api—
although;	
san—
being	so;	
prakṛtim—
transcendental	form;
svām—	
of	Myself;	
adhiṣṭhāya—
being	so	situated;	
sambhavāmi—
I	do
incarnate;	
ātma-māyayā—
by	My	internal	energy.TRANSLATION
Although	I	am	unborn	and	My	transcendental	body	never	deteriorates,
and	although	I	am	the	Lord	of	all	sentient	beings,	I	still	appear	in	every
millennium	in	My	original	transcendental	form.
PURPORT
The	Lord	has	spoken	about	the	peculiarity	of	His	birth:	although	He	may
appear	like	an	ordinary	person,	He	remembers	everything	of	His	many,	many
past	"births,"	whereas	a	common	man	cannot	remember	what	he	has	done
even	a	few	hours	before.	If	someone	is	asked	what	he	did	exactly	at	the	same
time	one	day	earlier,	it	would	be	very	difficult	for	a	common	man	to	answer
immediately.	He	would	surely	have	to	dredge	his	memory	to	recall	what	he
was	doing	exactly	at	the	same	time	one	day	before.	And	yet,	men	often	dare
claim	to	be	God,	or	Kṛṣṇa.	One	should	not	be	misled	by	such	meaningless
claims.	Then	again,	the	Lord	explains	His	
prakṛti	
or	His	form.	
Prakṛti	
means
nature	as	well	as	
svarūpa,	
or	one's	own	form.	The	Lord	says	that	He	appears
in	His	own	body.	He	does	not	change	His	body,	as	the	common	living	entity
changes	from	one	body	to	another.	The	conditioned	soul	may	have	one	kind	of
body	in	the	present	birth,	but	he	has	a	different	body	in	the	next	birth.	In	the
material	world,	the	living	entity	has	no	fixed	body	but	transmigrates	from	one
body	to	another.	The	Lord,	however,	does	not	do	so.	Whenever	He	appears,
He	does	so	in	the	same	original	body,	by	His	internal	potency.	In	other	words,
Kṛṣṇa	appears	in	this	material	world	in	His	original	eternal	form,	with	two
hands,	holding	a	flute.	He	appears	exactly	in	His	eternal	body,	uncontaminated
by	this	material	world.	Although	He	appears	in	the	same	transcendental	body
and	is	Lord	of	the	universe,	it	still	appears	that	He	takes	His	birth	like	an
ordinary	living	entity.	Despite	the	fact	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	grows	from	childhood	to
boyhood	and	from	boyhood	to	youth,	astonishingly	enough	He	never	ages
beyond	youth.	At	the	time	of	the	Battle	of	Kurukṣetra,	He	had	many
grandchildren	at	home;	or,	in	other	words,	He	had	sufficiently	aged	by
material	calculations.	Still	He	looked	just	like	a	young	man	twenty	or	twenty-
five	years	old.	We	never	see	a	picture	of	Kṛṣṇa	in	old	age	because	He	never
grows	old	like	us,	although	He	is	the	oldest	person	in	the	whole	creation–past,
present,	and	future.	Neither	His	body	nor	His	intelligence	ever	deteriorates	or
changes.	Therefore,	it	is	clear	that	in	spite	of	His	being	in	the	material	world,He	is	the	same	unborn,	eternal	form	of	bliss	and	knowledge,	changeless	in	His
transcendental	body	and	intelligence.	Factually,	His	appearance	and
disappearance	are	like	the	sun's	rising,	moving	before	us,	and	then
disappearing	from	our	eyesight.	When	the	sun	is	out	of	sight,	we	think	that	the
sun	is	set,	and	when	the	sun	is	before	our	eyes,	we	think	that	the	sun	is	on	the
horizon.	Actually,	the	sun	is	always	in	its	fixed	position,	but	owing	to	our
defective,	insufficient	senses,	we	calculate	the	appearance	and	disappearance
of	the	sun	in	the	sky.	And,	because	His	appearance	and	disappearance	are
completely	different	from	that	of	any	ordinary,	common	living	entity,	it	is
evident	that	He	is	eternal,	blissful	knowledge	by	His	internal	potency–and	He
is	never	contaminated	by	material	nature.	The	
Vedas
	also	confirm	that	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is	unborn,	yet	He	still	appears	to	take	His
birth	in	multi-	manifestations.	The	Vedic	supplementary	literatures	also
confirm	that	even	though	the	Lord	appears	to	be	taking	His	birth,	He	is	still
without	change	of	body.	In	the	
Bhāgavatam,	
He	appears	before	His	mother	as
Nārāyaṇa,	with	four	hands	and	the	decorations	of	the	six	kinds	of	full
opulences.	His	appearance	in	His	original	eternal	form	is	His	causeless	mercy,
according	to	the	
Viśvakośa	
dictionary.	The	Lord	is	conscious	of	all	of	His
previous	appearances	and	disappearances,	but	a	common	living	entity	forgets
everything	about	his	past	body	as	soon	as	he	gets	another	body.	He	is	the	Lord
of	all	living	entities	because	He	performs	wonderful	and	superhuman
activities	while	He	is	on	this	earth.	Therefore,	the	Lord	is	always	the	same
Absolute	Truth	and	is	without	differentiation	between	His	form	and	self,	or
between	His	quality	and	body.	A	question	may	now	be	raised	as	to	why	the
Lord	appears	and	disappears	in	this	world.	This	is	explained	in	the	next	verse.
TEXT	7
य द ा
	
य द ा
	
ि ह
	
ध म ᆼ ᇿ य
	
ᇩ ल ा ि न भ ᆼ व ि त
	
भ ा र त
	
।
अ ᇷ य ु ᇰ थ ा न म ध म ᆼ ᇿ य
	
त द ा ᇰ म ा न ं
	
स ृ ज ा ᇸ य ह म ्
	
॥
७
॥
yadā	yadā	hi	dharmasya
glānir	bhavati	bhārata
abhyutthānam	adharmasya
tadātmānaṁ	sṛjāmy	aham
yadā—
whenever;	
yadā—
wherever;	
hi—
certainly;	
dharmasya—
of	religion;glāniḥ—
discrepancies;	
bhavati—
manifested,	becomes;	
bhārata—
O
descendant	of	Bharata;	
abhyutthānam—
predominance;	
adharmasya—
of
irreligion;	
tadā—
at	that	time;	
ātmānam—
self;	
sṛjāmi—
manifest;	
aham—
I.
TRANSLATION
Whenever	and	wherever	there	is	a	decline	in	religious	practice,	O
descendant	of	Bharata,	and	a	predominant	rise	of	irreligion—at	that	time
I	descend	Myself.
PURPORT
The	word	
sṛjāmi
	is	significant	herein.	
Sṛjāmi
	cannot	be	used	in	the	sense	of
creation.	because,	according	to	the	previous	verse,	there	is	no	creation	of	the
Lord's	form	or	body,	since	all	of	the	forms	are	eternally	existent.	Therefore
sṛjāmi
	means	that	the	Lord	manifests	Himself	as	He	is.	Although	the	Lord
appears	on	schedule,	namely	at	the	end	of	Dvāpara-yuga	of	the	twenty-eighth
millennium	of	the	eighth	Manu,	in	one	day	of	Brahmā,	still	He	has	no
obligation	to	adhere	to	such	rules	and	regulations	because	He	is	completely
free	to	act	in	many	ways	at	His	will.	He	therefore	appears	by	His	own	will
whenever	there	is	a	predominance	of	irreligiosity	and	a	disappearance	of	true
religion.	Principles	of	religion	are	laid	down	in	the	
Vedas,	
and	any	discrepancy
in	the	matter	of	properly	executing	the	rules	of	the	
Vedas	
makes	one
irreligious.	In	the	
Bhāgavatam	
it	is	stated	that	such	principles	are	the	laws	of
the	Lord.	Only	the	Lord	can	manufacture	a	system	of	religion.	The	
Vedas	
are
also	accepted	as	originally	spoken	by	the	Lord	Himself	to	Brahmā,	from
within	his	heart.	Therefore,	the	principles	of	
dharma,	
or	religion,	are	the	direct
orders	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	
(dharmaṁ	tu	sākṣāt-bhagavat-
praṇītam).	
These	principles	are	clearly	indicated	throughout	the	
Bhagavad-
gītā.	
The	purpose	of	the	
Vedas
	is	to	establish	such	principles	under	the	order
of	the	Supreme	Lord,	and	the	Lord	directly	orders,	at	the	end	of	the	
Gītā
,	that
the	highest	principle	of	religion	is	to	surrender	unto	Him	only,	and	nothing
more.	The	Vedic	principles	push	one	towards	complete	surrender	unto	Him;
and,	whenever	such	principles	are	disturbed	by	the	demonic,	the	Lord	appears.
From	the	
Bhāgavatam	
we	understand	that	Lord	Buddha	is	the	incarnation	of
Kṛṣṇa	who	appeared	when	materialism	was	rampant	and	materialists	were
using	the	pretext	of	the	authority	of	the	
Vedas.	
Although	there	are	certainrestrictive	rules	and	regulations	regarding	animal	sacrifice	for	particular
purposes	in	the	
Vedas,	
people	of	demonic	tendency	still	took	to	animal
sacrifice	without	reference	to	the	Vedic	principles.	Lord	Buddha	appeared	to
stop	this	nonsense	and	to	establish	the	Vedic	principles	of	nonviolence.
Therefore	each	and	every	
avatāra,	
or	incarnation	of	the	Lord,	has	a	particular
mission,	and	they	are	all	described	in	the	revealed	scriptures.	No	one	should
be	accepted	as	an	
avatāra	
unless	he	is	referred	to	by	scriptures.	It	is	not	a	fact
that	the	Lord	appears	only	on	Indian	soil.	He	can	advent	Himself	anywhere
and	everywhere,	and	whenever	He	desires	to	appear.	In	each	and	every
incarnation,	He	speaks	as	much	about	religion	as	can	be	understood	by	the
particular	people	under	their	particular	circumstances.	But	the	mission	is	the
same
—	
to	lead	people	to	God	consciousness	and	obedience	to	the	principles	of
religion.	Sometimes	He	descends	personally,	and	sometimes	He	sends	His
bona	fide	representative	in	the	form	of	His	son,	or	servant,	or	Himself	in	some
disguised	form.
The	principles	of	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
were	spoken	to	Arjuna,	and,	for	that
matter,	to	other	highly	elevated	persons,	because	he	was	highly	advanced
compared	to	ordinary	persons	in	other	parts	of	the	world.	Two	plus	two	equals
four	is	a	mathematical	principle	that	is	true	both	in	the	beginner's	arithmetic
class	and	in	the	advanced	class	as	well.	Still,	there	are	higher	and	lower
mathematics.	In	all	incarnations	of	the	Lord,	therefore,	the	same	principles	are
taught,	but	they	appear	to	be	higher	and	lower	in	varied	circumstances.	The
higher	principles	of	religion	begin	with	the	acceptance	of	the	four	orders	and
the	four	statuses	of	social	life,	as	will	be	explained	later.	The	whole	purpose	of
the	mission	of	incarnations	is	to	arouse	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	everywhere.
Such	consciousness	is	manifest	and	nonmanifest	only	under	different
circumstances.
TEXT	8
प ि र त ् र ा ण ा य
	
स ा ध ू न ा ं
	
ि व न ा श ा य
	
च
	
द ु ᇾ क ृ त ा म ्
	
।
ध म ᆼ स ं ᇿ थ ा प न ा थ ा ᆼ य
	
स ᇸ भ व ा ि म
	
य ु ग े
	
य ु ग े
	
॥
८
॥
paritrāṇāya	sādhūnāṁ
vināśāya	ca	duṣkṛtām
dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya
sambhavāmi	yuge	yugeparitrāṇāya—
for	the	deliverance;	
sādhūnām—
of	the	devotees;	
vināśāya—
for	the	annihilation;	
ca—
also;	
duṣkṛtām—
of	the	miscreants;	
dharma
—
principles	of	religion;	
saṁsthāpana-arthāya—
to	reestablish;	
sambhavāmi—
I
do	appear;	
yuge—
millennium;	
yuge—
after	millennium.
TRANSLATION
In	order	to	deliver	the	pious	and	to	annihilate	the	miscreants,	as	well	as
to	reestablish	the	principles	of	religion,	I	advent	Myself	millennium	after
millennium.
PURPORT
According	to	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
a	
sādhu	
(holyman)	is	a	man	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	A	person	may	appear	to	be	irreligious,	but	if	he	has	the
qualifications	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	wholly	and	fully,	he	is	to	be	understood
to	be	a	
sādhu.	
And	
duṣkṛtam	
applies	to	one	who	doesn't	care	for	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	Such	miscreants,	or	
duṣkṛtam,	
are	described	as	foolish	and	the
lowest	of	mankind,	even	though	they	may	be	decorated	with	mundane
education;	whereas	another	person,	who	is	one	hundred	percent	engaged	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	is	accepted	as	
sādhu,	
even	though	such	a	person	may
neither	be	learned	nor	well	cultured.	As	far	as	the	atheistic	are	concerned,	it	is
not	necessary	for	the	Supreme	Lord	to	appear	as	He	is	to	destroy	them,	as	He
did	with	the	demons	Rāvaṇa	and	Kaṁsa.	The	Lord	has	many	agents	who	are
quite	competent	to	vanquish	demons.	But	the	Lord	especially	descends	to
appease	His	unalloyed	devotees,	who	are	always	harassed	by	the	demonic.
The	demon	harasses	the	devotee,	even	though	the	latter	may	happen	to	be	his
kin.	Although	Prahlāda	Mahārāja	was	the	son	of	Hiraṇyakaśipu,	he	was
nonetheless	persecuted	by	his	father;	although	Devakī,	the	mother	of	Kṛṣṇa,
was	the	sister	of	Kaṁsa,	she	and	her	husband	Vasudeva	were	persecuted	only
because	Kṛṣṇa	was	to	be	born	of	them.	So	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	appeared	primarily	to
deliver	Devakī,	rather	than	kill	Kaṁsa,	but	both	were	performed
simultaneously.	Therefore	it	is	said	here	that	to	deliver	the	devotee	and
vanquish	the	demon	miscreants,	the	Lord	appears	in	different	incarnations.
In	the	
Caitanya-caritāmṛta
	of	Kṛṣṇadāsa	Kavirāja,	the	following	verses
summarize	these	principles	of	incarnation:sṛṣṭi-hetu	yei	mūrti	prapañce	avatare
sei	īśvara-mūrti	'avatāra'	nāma	dhare
māyātita	paravyome	savāra	avasthāna
viśve	'avatāri'	dhare	'avatāra'	nāma.
"The	
avatāra,	
or	incarnation	of	Godhead,	descends	from	the	kingdom	of	God
for	material	manifestation.	And	the	particular	form	of	the	Personality	of
Godhead	who	so	descends	is	called	an	incarnation,	or	
avatāra.	
Such
incarnations	are	situated	in	the	spiritual	world,	the	kingdom	of	God.	When
they	descend	to	the	material	creation,	they	assume	the	name	
avatāra."
There	are	various	kinds	of	
avatāras,	
such	as	
puruṣāvatāras,	guṇāvatāras,
līlāvatāras,	śaktyāveśa	avatāras,	manvantara
–
avatāras	
and	
yugāvatāras—
all
appearing	on	schedule	all	over	the	universe.	But	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	primeval
Lord,	the	fountainhead	of	all	
avatāras.	
Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	descends	for	the
specific	purposes	of	mitigating	the	anxieties	of	the	pure	devotees,	who	are
very	anxious	to	see	Him	in	His	original	Vṛndāvana	pastimes.	Therefore,	the
prime	purpose	of	the	Kṛṣṇa	
avatāra
	is	to	satisfy	His	unalloyed	devotees.
The	Lord	says	that	He	incarnates	Himself	in	every	millennium.	This
indicates	that	He	incarnates	also	in	the	age	of	Kali.	As	stated	in	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam,	
the	incarnation	in	the	age	of	Kali	is	Lord	Caitanya	Mahāprabhu,
who	spread	the	worship	of	Kṛṣṇa	by	the	
saṅkīrtana	
movement	(congregational
chanting	of	the	holy	names),	and	spread	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	throughout
India.	He	predicted	that	this	culture	of	
saṅkīrtana	
would	be	broadcast	all	over
the	world,	from	town	to	town	and	village	to	village.	Lord	Caitanya	as	the
incarnation	of	Kṛṣṇa,	the	Personality	of	Godhead,	is	described	secretly	but	not
directly	in	the	confidential	parts	of	the	revealed	scriptures,	such	as	the
Upaniṣads,	Mahābhārata,	Bhāgavatam,	
etc.	The	devotees	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	are
much	attracted	by	the	
saṅkīrtana	
movement	of	Lord	Caitanya.	This	
avatāra	
of
the	Lord	does	not	kill	the	miscreants,	but	delivers	them	by	the	causeless	mercy
of	the	Lord.
TEXT	9
ज ᇳ म
	
क म ᆼ
	
च
	
म े
	
ि द ᇼ य म े व ं
	
य ो
	
व े ि ሧ
	
त ᇰ ᇰ व त ः
	
।
ᇰ य ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
द े ह ं
	
प ु न ज ᆼ ᇳ म
	
न ै ि त
	
म ा म े ि त
	
स ो ऽ ज ु ᆼ न
	
॥
९
॥
janma	karma	ca	me	divyamevaṁ	yo	vetti	tattvataḥ
tyaktvā	dehaṁ	punar	janma
naiti	mām	eti	so	'rjuna
janma—
birth;	
karma—
work;	
ca—
also;	
me—
of	Mine;	
divyam
—
transcendental;	
evam—
like	this;	
yaḥ—
anyone	who;	
vetti—
knows;	
tattvataḥ
—
in	reality;	
tyaktvā—
leaving	aside;	
deham—
this	body;	
punaḥ—
again;	
janma
—
birth;	
na—
never;	
eti—
does	attain;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
eti—
does	attain;	
saḥ
—
he;	
arjuna—
O	Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
One	who	knows	the	transcendental	nature	of	My	appearance	and
activities	does	not,	upon	leaving	the	body,	take	his	birth	again	in	this
material	world,	but	attains	My	eternal	abode,	O	Arjuna.
PURPORT
The	Lord's	descent	from	His	transcendental	abode	is	already	explained	in
the	6th	verse.	One	who	can	understand	the	truth	of	the	appearance	of	the
Personality	of	Godhead	is	already	liberated	from	material	bondage,	and
therefore	he	returns	to	the	kingdom	of	God	immediately	after	quitting	this
present	material	body.	Such	liberation	of	the	living	entity	from	material
bondage	is	not	at	all	easy.	The	impersonalists	and	the	
yogīs
	attain	liberation
only	after	much	trouble	and	many,	many	births.	Even	then,	the	liberation	they
achieve–merging	into	the	impersonal	
brahmajyoti	
of	the	Lord–is	only	partial,
and	there	is	the	risk	of	returning	again	to	this	material	world.	But	the	devotee,
simply	by	understanding	the	transcendental	nature	of	the	body	and	activities
of	the	Lord,	attains	the	abode	of	the	Lord	after	ending	this	body	and	does	not
run	the	risk	of	returning	again	to	this	material	world.	In	the	
Brahma-saṁhitā	
it
is	stated	that	the	Lord	has	many,	many	forms	and	incarnations:	
advaitam
acyutam	anādim	ananta-rūpam.	
Although	there	are	many	transcendental
forms	of	the	Lord,	they	are	still	one	and	the	same	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.	One	has	to	understand	this	fact	with	conviction,	although	it	is
incomprehensible	to	mundane	scholars	and	empiric	philosophers.	As	stated	in
the	
Vedas:eko	devo	nitya-līlānurakto	bhakta-vyāpī	hṛdy	antarātmā.
"The	one	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is	eternally	engaged	in	many,
many	transcendental	forms	in	relationships	with	His	unalloyed	devotees."	This
Vedic	version	is	confirmed	in	this	verse	of	the	
Gītā	
personally	by	the	Lord.	He
who	accepts	this	truth	on	the	strength	of	the	authority	of	the	
Vedas	
and	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	and	who	does	not	waste	time	in
philosophical	speculations	attains	the	highest	perfectional	stage	of	liberation.
Simply	by	accepting	this	truth	on	faith,	one	can,	without	a	doubt,	attain
liberation.	The	Vedic	version,	
"tattvamasi,"
	is	actually	applied	in	this	case.
Anyone	who	understands	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	to	be	the	Supreme,	or	who	says	unto	the
Lord,	"You	are	the	same	Supreme	Brahman,	the	Personality	of	Godhead"	is
certainly	liberated	instantly,	and	consequently	his	entrance	into	the
transcendental	association	of	the	Lord	is	guaranteed.	In	other	words,	such	a
faithful	devotee	of	the	Lord	attains	perfection,	and	this	is	confirmed	by	the
following	Vedic	assertion:
tam	eva	viditvātimṛtyumeti	nānyaḥ	panthā	vidyate	ayanāya.
One	can	attain	the	perfect	stage	of	liberation	from	birth	and	death	simply	by
knowing	the	Lord,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	There	is	no
alternative	because	anyone	who	does	not	understand	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	as	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is	surely	in	the	mode	of	ignorance.
Consequently	he	will	not	attain	salvation,	simply,	so	to	speak,	by	licking	the
outer	surface	of	the	bottle	of	honey,	or	by	interpreting	the	
Bhagavad-gītā
according	to	mundane	scholarship.	Such	empiric	philosophers	may	assume
very	important	roles	in	the	material	world,	but	they	are	not	necessarily	eligible
for	liberation.	Such	puffed	up	mundane	scholars	have	to	wait	for	the	causeless
mercy	of	the	devotee	of	the	Lord.	One	should	therefore	cultivate	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	with	faith	and	knowledge,	and	in	this	way	attain	perfection.
TEXT	10
<
व ी त र ा ग भ य क ् र ो ध ा
	
म ᇳ म य ा
	
म ा म ु प ा ि श ् र त ा ः
	
।
ब ह व ो
	
ᇥ ा न त प स ा
	
प ू त ा
	
म द ् भ ा व म ा ग त ा ः
	
॥
१ ०
॥
vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhāman-mayā	mām	upāśritāḥ
bahavo	jñāna-tapasā
pūtā	mad-bhāvam	āgatāḥ
vīta—
freed	from;	
rāga—
attachment;	
bhaya—
fear;	
krodhāḥ—
anger;	
mat-
mayā—
fully	in	Me;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
upāśritāḥ—
being	fully	situated;	
bahavaḥ
—many;	
jñāna—
knowledge;	
tapasā—
by	penance;	
pūtāḥ—
being	purified;
mat-bhāvam—
transcendental	love	for	Me;	
āgatāḥ—
attained.
TRANSLATION
Being	freed	from	attachment,	fear	and	anger,	being	fully	absorbed	in
Me	and	taking	refuge	in	Me,	many,	many	persons	in	the	past	became
purifled	by	knowledge	of	Me—and	thus	they	all	attained	transcendental
love	for	Me.
PURPORT
As	described	above,	it	is	very	difficult	for	a	person	who	is	too	materially
affected	to	understand	the	personal	nature	of	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth.
Generally,	people	who	are	attached	to	the	bodily	conception	of	life	are	so
absorbed	in	materialism	that	it	is	almost	impossible	for	them	to	understand
that	there	is	a	transcendental	body	which	is	imperishable,	full	of	knowledge
and	eternally	blissful.	In	the	materialistic	concept,	the	body	is	perishable,	full
of	ignorance	and	completely	miserable.	Therefore,	people	in	general	keep	this
same	bodily	idea	in	mind	when	they	are	informed	of	the	personal	form	of	the
Lord.	For	such	materialistic	men,	the	form	of	the	gigantic	material
manifestation	is	supreme.	Consequently	they	consider	the	Supreme	to	be
impersonal.	And	because	they	are	too	materially	absorbed,	the	conception	of
retaining	the	personality	after	liberation	from	matter	frightens	them.	When
they	are	informed	that	spiritual	life	is	also	individual	and	personal,	they
become	afraid	of	becoming	persons	again,	and	so	they	naturally	prefer	a	kind
of	merging	into	the	impersonal	void.	Generally,	they	compare	the	living
entities	to	the	bubbles	of	the	ocean,	which	merge	into	the	ocean.	That	is	the
highest	perfection	of	spiritual	existence	attainable	without	individual
personality.	This	is	a	kind	of	fearful	stage	of	life,	devoid	of	perfect	knowledge
of	spiritual	existence.	Furthermore	there	are	many	persons	who	cannotunderstand	spiritual	existence	at	all.	Being	embarassed	by	so	many	theories
and	by	contradictions	of	various	types	of	philosophical	speculation,	they
become	disgusted	or	angry	and	foolishly	conclude	that	there	is	no	supreme
cause	and	that	everything	is	ultimately	void.	Such	people	are	in	a	diseased
condition	of	life.	Some	people	are	too	materially	attached	and	therefore	do	not
give	attention	to	spiritual	life,	some	of	them	want	to	merge	into	the	supreme
spiritual	cause,	and	some	of	them	disbelieve	in	everything,	being	angry	at	all
sorts	of	spiritual	speculation	out	of	hopelessness.	This	last	class	of	men	take	to
the	shelter	of	some	kind	of	intoxication,	and	their	affective	hallucinations	are
sometimes	accepted	as	spiritual	vision.	One	has	to	get	rid	of	all	three	stages	of
attachment	to	the	material	world:	negligence	of	spiritual	life,	fear	of	a	spiritual
personal	identity,	and	the	conception	of	void	that	underlies	the	frustration	of
life.	To	get	free	from	these	three	stages	of	the	material	concept	of	life,	one	has
to	take	complete	shelter	of	the	Lord,	guided	by	the	bona	fide	spiritual	master,
and	follow	the	disciplines	and	regulative	principles	of	devotional	life.	The	last
stage	of	the	devotional	life	is	called	
bhāva,	
or	transcendental	love	of	Godhead.
According	to	
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu,	
the	science	of	devotional	service:
ādau	śraddhā	tataḥ	sādhu-saṅgo	'tha	bhajana-kriyā
tato	'nartha-nivṛttiḥ	syāt	tato	niṣṭhā	rucis	tataḥ
athāsaktis	tato	bhāvas	tataḥ	premābhyudañcati
sādhakānām	ayaṁ	premṇaḥ	prādurbhāve	bhavet	kramaḥ.
"In	the	beginning	one	must	have	a	preliminary	desire	for	self-realization.	This
will	bring	one	to	the	stage	of	trying	to	associate	with	persons	who	are
spiritually	elevated.	In	next	stage	one	becomes	initiated	by	an	elevated
spiritual	master,	and	under	his	instruction	the	neophyte	devotee	begins	the
process	of	devotional	service.	By	execution	of	devotional	service	under	the
guidance	of	the	spiritual	master,	one	becomes	free	from	all	material
attachment,	attains	steadiness	in	self-realization,	and	acquires	a	taste	for
hearing	about	the	Absolute	Personality	of	Godhead,	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.	This	taste	leads
one	further	forward	to	attachment	for	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	which	is	matured
in	
bhāva,	
or	the	preliminary	stage	of	transcendental	love	of	God.	Real	love	for
God	is	called	
premā
,	the	highest	perfectional	stage	of	life."	In	the	
premā
	stage
there	is	constant	engagement	in	the	transcendental	loving	service	of	the	Lord.
So,	by	the	slow	process	of	devotional	service,	under	the	guidance	of	the	bona
fide	spiritual	master,	one	can	attain	the	highest	stage,	being	freed	from	all
material	attachment,	from	the	fearfulness	of	one's	individual	spiritualpersonality,	and	from	the	frustrations	resulting	from	void	philosophy.	Then
one	can	ultimately	attain	to	the	abode	of	the	Supreme	Lord.
TEXT	11
य े
	
य थ ा
	
म ा ं
	
प ् र प ሱ ᇳ त े
	
त ा ं ᇿ त थ ै व
	
भ ज ा ᇸ य ह म ्
	
।
म म
	
व ᇰ म ा ᆼ न ु व त ᆼ ᇳ त े
	
म न ु ᇾ य ा ः
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
स व ᆼ श ः
	
॥
१ १
॥
ye	yathā	māṁ	prapadyante
tāṁs	tathaiva	bhajāmy	aham
mama	vartmānuvartante
manuṣyāḥ	pārtha	sarvaśaḥ
ye—
all	of	them;	
yathā—
as;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
prapadyante—
surrender;	
tān
—
unto	them;	
tathā—
so;	
eva—
certainly;	
bhajāmi—
do	I	reward;	
aham—
I;
mama—
My;	
vartma—
path;	
anuvartante—
do	follow;	
manuṣyāḥ—
all	men;
pārtha—
O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
sarvaśaḥ—
in	all	respects.
TRANSLATION
All	of	them—as	they	surrender	unto	Me—I	reward	accordingly.
Everyone	follows	My	path	in	all	respects,	O	son	of	Pṛthā.
PURPORT
Eveyone	is	searching	for	Kṛṣṇa	in	the	different	aspects	of	His
manifestations.	Kṛṣṇa,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	is	partially
realized	in	His	impersonal	
brahmajyoti	
effulgence	and	as	the	all-pervading
Supersoul	dwelling	within	everything,	including	the	particles	of	atoms.	But
Kṛṣṇa	is	only	fully	realized	by	His	pure	devotees.	Consequently,	Kṛṣṇa	is	the
object	of	everyone's	realization,	and	thus	anyone	and	everyone	is	satisfied
according	to	one's	desire	to	have	Him.	In	the	transcendental	world	also,	Kṛṣṇa
reciprocates	with	His	pure	devotees	in	the	transcendental	attitude,	just	as	the
devotee	wants	Him.	One	devotee	may	want	Kṛṣṇa	as	supreme	master,	another
as	his	personal	friend,	another	as	his	son,	and	still	another	as	his	lover.	Kṛṣṇa
rewards	all	the	devotees	equally,	according	to	their	different	intensities	of	lovefor	Him.	In	the	material	world,	the	same	reciprocations	of	feelings	are	there,
and	they	are	equally	exchanged	by	the	Lord	with	the	different	types	of
worshipers.	The	pure	devotees	both	here	and	in	the	transcendental	abode
associate	with	Him	in	person	and	are	able	to	render	personal	service	to	the
Lord	and	thus	derive	transcendental	bliss	in	His	loving	service.	As	for	those
who	are	impersonalists	and	who	want	to	commit	spiritual	suicide	by
annihilating	the	individual	existence	of	the	living	entity,	Kṛṣṇa	helps	also	by
absorbing	them	into	His	effulgence.	Such	impersonalists	do	not	agree	to
accept	the	eternal,	blissful	Personality	of	Godhead;	consequently	they	cannot
relish	the	bliss	of	transcendental	personal	service	to	the	Lord,	having
extinguished	their	individuality.	Some	of	them,	who	are	not	situated	even	in
the	impersonal	existence,	return	to	this	material	field	to	exhibit	their	dormant
desires	for	activities.	They	are	not	admitted	in	the	spiritual	planets,	but	they
are	again	given	a	chance	to	act	on	the	material	planets.	For	those	who	are
fruitive	workers,	the	Lord	awards	the	desired	results	of	their	prescribed	duties,
as	the	
yajñeśvara
;	and	those	who	are	
yogīs
	seeking	mystic	powers	are
awarded	such	powers.	In	other	words,	everyone	is	dependant	for	success	upon
His	mercy	alone,	and	all	kinds	of	spiritual	processes	are	but	different	degrees
of	success	on	the	same	path.	Unless,	therefore,	one	comes	to	the	highest
perfection	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	all	attempts	remain	imperfect,	as	is	stated
in	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:
akāmaḥ	sarva-kāmo	vā	mokṣa-kāma	udāradhīḥ
tīvreṇa	bhakti-yogena	yajeta	puruṣaṁ	param
"Whether	one	is	without	desire	[the	condition	of	the	devotees],	or	is	desirous
of	all	fruitive	results,	or	is	after	liberation,	one	should	with	all	efforts	try	to
worship	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	for	complete	perfection,
culminating	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness."	
(Bhāg.	
2.3.10)
TEXT	12
क ा ङ ् ᇤ ᇳ त ः
	
क म ᆼ ण ा ं
	
ि स द ् ि ध ं
	
य ज ᇳ त
	
इ ह
	
द े व त ा ः
	
।
ि ᇤ प ् र ं
	
ि ह
	
म ा न ु ष े
	
ल ो क े
	
ि स द ् ि ध भ ᆼ व ि त
	
क म ᆼ ज ा
	
॥
१ २
॥
kāṅkṣantaḥ	karmaṇāṁ	siddhiṁ
yajanta	iha	devatāḥ
kṣipraṁ	hi	mānuṣe	lokesiddhir	bhavati	karmajā
kāṅkṣantaḥ—
desiring;	
karmaṇām—
of	fruitive	activities;	
siddhim
—
perfection;	
yajante—
worship	by	sacrifices;	
iha—
in	the	material	world;
devatāḥ—
the	demigods;	
kṣipram—
very	quickly;	
hi—
certainly;	
mānuṣe—
in
human	society;	
loke—
within	this	world;	
siddhiḥ	bhavati—
becomes	successful;
karmajā—
the	fruitive	worker.
TRANSLATION
Men	in	this	world	desire	success	in	fruitive	activities,	and	therefore
they	worship	the	demigods.	Quickly,	of	course,	men	get	results	from
fruitive	work	in	this	world.
PURPORT
There	is	a	great	misconception	about	the	gods	or	demigods	of	this	material
world,	and	men	of	less	intelligence,	although	passing	as	great	scholars,	take
these	demigods	to	be	various	forms	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	Actually,	the
demigods	are	not	different	forms	of	God,	but	they	are	God's	different	parts	and
parcels.	God	is	one,	and	the	parts	and	parcels	are	many.	The	
Vedas	
say,	
nityo
nityānām:	
God	is	one.	
Īśvaraḥ	paramaḥ	kṛṣṇaḥ.	
The	Supreme	God	is	one–
Kṛṣṇa–and	the	demigods	are	delegated	with	powers	to	manage	this	material
world.	These	demigods	are	all	living	entities	
(nityānām)	
with	different	grades
of	material	power.	They	cannot	be	equal	to	the	Supreme	God–Nārāyaṇa,
Viṣṇu,	or	Kṛṣṇa.	Anyone	who	thinks	that	God	and	the	demigods	are	on	the
same	level	is	called	an	atheist,	or	
pāṣaṇḍī.	
Even	the	great	demigods	like
Brahmā	and	Śiva	cannot	be	compared	to	the	Supreme	Lord.	In	fact,	the	Lord
is	worshiped	by	demigods	such	as	Brahmā	and	Śiva	
(śiva-viriñci-nutam).	
Yet
curiously	enough	there	are	many	human	leaders	who	are	worshiped	by	foolish
men	under	the	misunderstanding	of	anthropomorphism	or	zoomorphism.	
Iha
devatāḥ	
denotes	a	powerful	man	or	demigod	of	this	material	world.	But
Nārāyaṇa,	Viṣṇu	or	Kṛṣṇa,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	does	not
belong	to	this	world.	He	is	above,	or	transcendental	to,	material	creation.	Even
Śrīpāda	Śaṅkarācārya,	the	leader	of	the	impersonalists,	maintains	that
Nārāyaṇa,	or	Kṛṣṇa,	is	beyond	this	material	creation.	However,	foolish	people
(
hṛt-añjana
)	worship	the	demigods	because	they	want	immediate	results.	Theyget	the	results,	but	do	not	know	that	results	so	obtained	are	temporary	and	are
meant	for	less	intelligent	persons.	The	intelligent	person	is	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	and	he	has	no	need	to	worship	the	paltry	demigods	for	some
immediate,	temporary	benefit.	The	demigods	of	this	material	world,	as	well	as
their	worshipers,	will	vanish	with	the	annihilation	of	this	material	world.	The
boons	of	the	demigods	are	material	and	temporary.	Both	the	material	worlds
and	their	inhabitants,	including	the	demigods,	and	their	worshipers,	are
bubbles	in	the	cosmic	ocean.	In	this	world,	however,	human	society	is	mad
after	temporary	things	such	as	the	material	opulence	of	possessing	land,
family	and	enjoyable	paraphernalia.	To	achieve	such	temporary	things,	they
worship	the	demigods	or	powerful	men	in	human	society.	If	a	man	gets	some
ministership	in	the	government	by	worshiping	a	political	leader,	he	considers
that	he	has	achieved	a	great	boon.	All	of	them	are	therefore	kowtowing	to	the
so-called	leaders	or	"big	guns"	in	order	to	achieve	temporary	boons,	and	they
indeed	achieve	such	things.	Such	foolish	men	are	not	interested	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	for	the	permanent	solution	to	the	hardships	of	material
existence.	They	are	all	after	sense	enjoyment,	and	to	get	a	little	facility	for
sense	enjoyment	they	are	attracted	to	worship	empowered	living	entities
known	as	demigods.	This	verse	indicates	that	people	are	rarely	interested	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	They	are	mostly	interested	in	material	enjoyment,	and
therefore	they	worship	some	powerful	living	entity.
TEXT	13
च ा त ु व ᆼ ᇯ य ᆾ
	
म य ा
	
स ृ ᇾ ट ं
	
ग ु ण क म ᆼ ि व भ ा ग श ः
	
।
त ᇿ य
	
क त ा ᆼ र म ि प
	
म ा ं
	
ि व ሬ ᆸ क त ा ᆼ र म ᇼ य य म ्
	
॥
१ ३
॥
cātur-varṇyaṁ	mayā	sṛṣṭaṁ
guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ
tasya	kartāram	api	māṁ
viddhy	akartāram	avyayam
cātur-varṇyam—
the	four	divisions	of	human	society;	
mayā—
by	Me;	
sṛṣṭam
—
created;	
guṇa—
quality;	
karma—
work;	
vibhāgaśaḥ—
in	terms	of	division;
tasya—
of	that;	
kartāram—
the	father;	
api—
although;	
mām—
Me;	
viddhi—
you
may	know;	
akartāram—
as	the	non-doer;	
avyayam—
being	unchangeable.TRANSLATION
According	to	the	three	modes	of	material	nature	and	the	work	ascribed
to	them,	the	four	divisions	of	human	society	were	created	by	Me.	And,
although	I	am	the	creator	of	this	system,	you	should	know	that	I	am	yet
the	non-doer,	being	unchangeable.
PURPORT
The	Lord	is	the	creator	of	everything.	Everything	is	born	of	Him,
everything	is	sustained	by	Him,	and	everything,	after	annihilation,	rests	in
Him.	He	is	therefore	the	creator	of	the	four	divisions	of	the	social	order,
beginning	with	the	intelligent	class	of	men,	technically	called	
brāhmaṇas	
due
to	their	being	situated	in	the	mode	of	goodness.	Next	is	the	administrative
class,	technically	called	the	
kṣatriyas	
due	to	their	being	situated	in	the	mode	of
passion.	The	mercantile	men,	called	the	
vaiśyas
,	are	situated	in	the	mixed
modes	of	passion	and	ignorance,	and	the	
śūdras,	
or	laborer	class,	are	situated
in	the	ignorant	mode	of	material	nature.	In	spite	of	His	creating	the	four
divisions	of	human	society,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	does	not	belong	to	any	of	these
divisions,	because	He	is	not	one	of	the	conditioned	souls,	a	section	of	whom
form	human	society.	Human	society	is	similar	to	any	other	animal	society,	but
to	elevate	men	from	the	animal	status,	the	abovementioned	divisions	are
created	by	the	Lord	for	the	systematic	development	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
The	tendency	of	a	particular	man	toward	work	is	determined	by	the	modes	of
material	nature	which	he	has	acquired.	Such	symptoms	of	life,	according	to
different	modes	of	material	nature,	are	described	in	the	Eighteenth	Chapter	of
this	book.	A	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	however,	is	above	even	the
brāhmaṇas,	
because	a	
brāhmaṇa	
by	quality	is	supposed	to	know	about
Brahman,	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth.	Most	of	them	approach	the	impersonal
Brahman	manifestation	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	but	only	a	man	who	transcends	the
limited	knowledge	of	a	
brāhmaṇa	
and	reaches	the	knowledge	of	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa,	becomes	a	person	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness-or,	in	other	words,	a	
Vaiṣṇava.	
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	includes
knowledge	of	all	different	plenary	expansions	of	Kṛṣṇa,	namely	Rāma,
Nṛsiṁha,	Varāha,	etc.	However,	as	Kṛṣṇa	is	transcendental	to	this	system	of
the	four	divisions	of	human	society,	a	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	alsotranscendental	to	all	divisions	of	human	society,	whether	we	consider	the
divisions	of	community,	nation	or	species.
TEXT	14
न
	
म ा ं
	
क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
ि ल ᇸ प ि ᇳ त
	
न
	
म े
	
क म ᆼ फ ल े
	
ᇿ प ृ ह ा
	
।
इ ि त
	
म ा ं
	
य ो ऽ ि भ ज ा न ा ि त
	
क म ᆼ ि भ न ᆼ
	
स
	
ब ᇲ य त े
	
॥
१ ४
॥
>
na	māṁ	karmāṇi	limpanti
na	me	karma-phale	spṛhā
iti	māṁ	yo	'bhijānāti
karmabhir	na	sa	badhyate
na—
never;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
karmāṇi—
all	kinds	of	work;	
limpanti—
do
affect;	
na—
nor;	
me—
My;
	karma-phale—
in	fruitive	action;	
spṛhā—
aspiration;
iti—
thus;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
yaḥ—
one	who;	
abhijānāti—
does	know;	
karmabhiḥ
—by	the	reaction	of	such	work;	
na—
never	does;	
saḥ—
he;	
badhyate—
become
entangled.
TRANSLATION
There	is	no	work	that	affects	Me;	nor	do	I	aspire	for	the	fruits	of
action.	One	who	understands	this	truth	about	Me	also	does	not	become
entangled	in	the	fruitive	reactions	of	work.
PURPORT
As	there	are	constitutional	laws	in	the	material	world	stating	that	the	king
can	do	no	wrong,	or	that	the	king	is	not	subject	to	the	state	laws,	similarly	the
Lord,	although	He	is	the	creator	of	this	material	world,	is	not	affected	by	the
activities	of	the	material	world.	He	creates	and	remains	aloof	from	the
creation,	whereas	the	living	entities	are	entangled	in	the	fruitive	results	of
material	activities	because	of	their	propensity	for	lording	it	over	material
resources.	The	proprietor	of	an	establishment	is	not	responsible	for	the	right
and	wrong	activities	of	the	workers,	but	the	workers	are	themselves
responsible.	The	living	entities	are	engaged	in	their	respective	activities	ofsense	gratification,	and	these	activities	are	not	ordained	by	the	Lord.	For
advancement	of	sense	gratification,	the	living	entities	are	engaged	in	the	work
of	this	world,	and	they	aspire	to	heavenly	happiness	after	death.	The	Lord,
being	full	in	Himself,	has	no	attraction	for	so-called	heavenly	happiness.	The
heavenly	demigods	are	only	His	engaged	servants.	The	proprietor	never
desires	the	low-grade	happiness	such	as	the	workers	may	desire.	He	is	aloof
from	the	material	actions	and	reactions.	For	example,	the	rains	are	not
responsible	for	different	types	of	vegetation	that	appear	on	the	earth,	although
without	such	rains	there	is	no	possibility	of	vegetative	growth.	Vedic	
smṛti
confirms	this	fact	as	follows:
nimitta-mātram	evāsau	sṛjyānāṁ	sarga-karmaṇi
pradhāna-kāraṇī-bhūtā	yato	vai	sṛjya-śaktayaḥ.
In	the	material	creations,	the	Lord	is	only	the	supreme	cause.	The
immediate	cause	is	material	nature	by	which	the	cosmic	manifestation	is
visible.	The	created	beings	are	of	many	varieties,	such	as	the	demigods,
human	beings	and	lower	animals,	and	all	of	them	are	subject	to	the	reactions
of	their	past	good	or	bad	activities.	The	Lord	only	gives	them	the	proper
facilities	for	such	activities	and	the	regulations	of	the	modes	of	nature,	but	He
is	never	responsible	for	their	past	and	present	activities.	In	the	
Vedānta-sūtras
it	is	confirmed	that	the	Lord	is	never	partial	to	any	living	entity.	The	living
entity	is	responsible	for	his	own	acts.	The	Lord	only	gives	him	facilities,
through	the	agency	of	material	nature,	the	external	energy.	Anyone	who	is
fully	conversant	with	all	the	intricacies	of	this	law	of	
karma,	
or	fruitive
activities,	does	not	become	affected	by	the	results	of	his	activities.	In	other
words,	the	person	who	understands	this	transcendental	nature	of	the	Lord	is	an
experienced	man	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	and	thus	he	is	never	subjected	to	the
laws	of	
karma.	
One	who	does	not	know	the	transcendental	nature	of	the	Lord
and	who	thinks	that	the	activities	of	the	Lord	are	aimed	at	fruitive	results,	as
are	the	activities	of	the	ordinary	living	entities,	certainly	becomes	entangled
himself	in	fruitive	reaction.	But	one	who	knows	the	Supreme	Truth	is	a
liberated	soul	fixed	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
TEXT	15
ए व ं
	
ᇥ ा ᇰ व ा
	
क ृ त ं
	
क म ᆼ
	
प ू व ᆺ र ि प
	
म ु म ु ᇤ ु ि भ ः
	
।
क ु ኄ
	
क म ᆺ व
	
त ᇿ म ा ᇰ ᇰ व ं
	
प ू व ᆺ ः
	
प ू व ᆼ त र ं
	
क ृ त म ्
	
॥
१ ५
॥evaṁ	jñātvā	kṛtaṁ	karma
pūrvair	api	mumukṣubhiḥ
kuru	karmaiva	tasmāt	tvaṁ
pūrvaiḥ	pūrvataraṁ	kṛtam
evam—
thus;	
jñātvā—
knowing	well;	
kṛtam—
performed;	
karma—
work;
pūrvaiḥ—
by	past	authorities;	
api—
although;	
mumukṣubhiḥ—
who	attained
liberation;	
kuru—
just	perform;	
karma—
prescribed	duty;	
eva—
certainly;
tasmāt—
therefore;	
tvam—
you;
	pūrvaiḥ—
by	the	predecessors;	
pūrvataram—
ancient	predecessors;	
kṛtam—
as	performed.
TRANSLATION
All	the	liberated	souls	in	ancient	times	acted	with	this	understanding
and	so	attained	liberation.	Therefore,	as	the	ancients,	you	should	perform
your	duty	in	this	divine	consciousness.
PURPORT
There	are	two	classes	of	men.	Some	of	them	are	full	of	polluted	material
things	within	their	hearts,	and	some	of	them	are	materially	free.	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	equally	beneficial	for	both	of	these	persons.	Those	who	are
full	of	dirty	things	can	take	to	the	line	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	for	a	gradual
cleansing	process,	following	the	regulative	principles	of	devotional	service.
Those	who	are	already	cleansed	of	the	impurities	may	continue	to	act	in	the
same	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	so	that	others	may	follow	their	exemplary	activities
and	thereby	be	benefitted.	Foolish	persons	or	neophytes	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	often	want	to	retire	from	activities	without	having	knowledge
of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Arjuna's	desire	to	retire	from	activities	on	the
battlefield	was	not	approved	by	the	Lord.	One	need	only	know	how	to	act.	To
retire	from	the	activities	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	to	sit	aloof	making	a
show	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	is	less	important	than	actually	engaging	in	the
field	of	activities	for	the	sake	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Arjuna	is	here	advised	to	act	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	following	in	the	footsteps	of	the	Lord's	previous	disciples,	such
as	the	sun-god	Vivasvān,	as	mentioned	hereinbefore.	The	Supreme	Lord
knows	all	His	past	activities,	as	well	as	those	of	persons	who	acted	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	in	the	past.	Therefore	He	recommends	the	acts	of	the	sun-god,who	learned	this	art	from	the	Lord	some	millions	of	years	before.	All	such
students	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	are	mentioned	here	as	past	liberated	persons,	engaged
in	the	discharge	of	duties	allotted	by	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	16
ि क ं
	
क म ᆼ
	
ि क म क म ᆹ ि त
	
क व य ो ऽ ᇴ य त ् र
	
म ो ि ह त ा ः
	
।
त ሧ े
	
क म ᆼ
	
प ् र व ቎ य ा ि म
	
य ᇬ ᇥ ा ᇰ व ा
	
म ो ቎ य स े ऽ श ु भ ा त ्
	
॥
१ ६
॥
kiṁ	karma	kim	akarmeti
kavayo	'py	atra	mohitāḥ
tat	te	karma	pravakṣyāmi
yaj	jñātvā	mokṣyase	'śubhāt
kim—
what	is;	
karma—
action;	
kim—
what	is;	
akarma—
inaction;	
iti—
thus;
kavayaḥ—
the	intelligent;	
api—
also;	
atra—
in	this	matter;	
mohitāḥ
—
bewildered;	
tat—
that;	
te—
unto	you;
	karma—
work;	
pravakṣyāmi—
I	shall
explain;	
yat—
which;	
jñātvā—
knowing;	
mokṣyase—
be	liberated;	
aśubhāt
—
from	ill	fortune.
TRANSLATION
Even	the	intelligent	are	bewildered	in	determining	what	is	action	and
what	is	inaction.	Now	I	shall	explain	to	you	what	action	is,	knowing	which
you	shall	be	liberated	from	all	sins.
PURPORT
Action	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	has	to	be	executed	in	accord	with	the
examples	of	previous	bona	fide	devotees.	This	is	recommended	in	the	15th
verse.	Why	such	action	should	not	be	independant	will	be	explained	in	the	text
to	follow.
To	act	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	one	has	to	follow	the	leadership	of
authorized	persons	who	are	in	a	line	of	disciplic	succession	as	explained	in	the
beginning	of	this	chapter.	The	system	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	was	first
narrated	to	the	sun-god,	the	sun-god	explained	it	to	his	son	Manu,	Manuexplained	it	to	his	son	Ikṣvāku,	and	the	system	is	current	on	this	earth	from
that	very	remote	time.	Therefore,	one	has	to	follow	in	the	footsteps	of
previous	authorities	in	the	line	of	disciplic	succession.	Otherwise	even	the
most	intelligent	men	will	be	bewildered	regarding	the	standard	actions	of
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	For	this	reason,	the	Lord	decided	to	instruct	Arjuna	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	directly.	Because	of	the	direct	instruction	of	the	Lord	to
Arjuna,	anyone	who	follows	in	the	footsteps	of	Arjuna	is	certainly	not
bewildered.
It	is	said	that	one	cannot	ascertain	the	ways	of	religion	simply	by	imperfect
experimental	knowledge.	Actually,	the	principles	of	religion	can	only	be	laid
down	by	the	Lord	Himself.	
Dharmaṁ	hi	sākṣāt-	bhagavat-praṇītam.	
No	one
can	manufacture	a	religious	principle	by	imperfect	speculation.	One	must
follow	in	the	footsteps	of	great	authorities	like	Brahmā,	Śiva,	Nārada,	Manu,
Kumāra,	Kapila,	Prahlāda,	Bhīṣma,	Śukadeva	Gosvāmī,	Yamarāja,	Janaka,
etc.	By	mental	speculation	one	cannot	ascertain	what	is	religion	or	self-
realization.	Therefore,	out	of	causeless	mercy	to	His	devotees,	the	Lord
explains	directly	to	Arjuna	what	action	is	and	what	inaction	is.	Only	action
performed	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	can	deliver	a	person	from	the	entanglement
of	material	existence.
TEXT	17
क म ᆼ ण ो
	
ቋ ि प
	
ब ो ሬ ᇼ य ं
	
ब ो ሬ ᇼ य ं
	
च
	
ि व क म ᆼ ण ः
	
।
अ क म ᆼ ण ᇽ च
	
ब ो ሬ ᇼ य ं
	
ग ह न ा
	
क म ᆼ ण ो
	
ग ि त ः
	
॥
१ ७
॥
karmaṇo	hy	api	boddhavyaṁ
boddhavyaṁ	ca	vikarmaṇaḥ
akarmaṇaś	ca	boddhavyaṁ
gahanā	karmaṇo	gatiḥ
karmaṇaḥ—
working	order;	
hi—
certainly;	
api—
also;	
boddhavyam—
should
be	understood;	
boddhavyam—
to	be	understood;	
ca—
also;	
vikarmaṇaḥ—
forbidden	work;	
akarmaṇaḥ—
inaction;	
ca—
also;	
boddhavyam—
should	be
understood;	
gahanā—
very	difficult;	
karmaṇaḥ—
working	order;	
gatiḥ—
to
enter	into.
TRANSLATIONThe	intricacies	of	action	are	very	hard	to	understand.	Therefore	one
should	know	properly	what	action	is,	what	forbidden	action	is,	and	what
inaction	is.
PURPORT
If	one	is	serious	about	liberation	from	material	bondage,	one	has	to
understand	the	distinctions	between	action,	inaction	and	unauthorized	actions.
One	has	to	apply	oneself	to	such	an	analysis	of	action,	reaction	and	perverted
actions	because	it	is	a	very	difficult	subject	matter.	To	understand	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	and	action	according	to	the	modes,	one	has	to	learn	one's
relationship	with	the	Supreme;	i.e.,	one	who	has	learned	perfectly	knows	that
every	living	entity	is	the	eternal	servitor	of	the	Lord	and	that	consequently	one
has	to	act	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	The	entire	
Bhagavad-gītā
	is	directed
toward	this	conclusion.	Any	other	conclusions,	against	this	consciousness	and
its	attendant	reactions,	are	
vikarmas,	
or	prohibitive	actions.	To	understand	all
this	one	has	to	associate	with	authorities	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	learn	the
secret	from	them;	this	is	as	good	as	learning	from	the	Lord	directly.
Otherwise,	even	the	most	intelligent	person	will	be	bewildered.
TEXT	18
क म ᆼ ᇯ य क म ᆼ
	
य ः
	
प ᇽ य े द क म ᆼ ि ण
	
च
	
क म ᆼ
	
य ः
	
।
स
	
ब ु द ् ि ध म ा ᇳ म न ु ᇾ य े ष ु
	
स
	
य ु ᇧ त ः
	
क ृ ᇰ ᇿ न क म ᆼ क ृ त ्
	
॥
१ ८
॥
karmaṇy	akarma	yaḥ	paśyed
akarmaṇi	ca	karma	yaḥ
sa	buddhimān	manuṣyeṣu
sa	yuktaḥ	kṛtsna-karma-kṛt
karmaṇi—
in	action;	
akarma—
inaction;	
yaḥ—
one	who;	
paśyet—
observes;
akarmaṇi—
in	inaction;	
ca—
also;	
karma—
fruitive	action;	
yaḥ—
one	who;	
saḥ
—
he;	
buddhimān—
is	intelligent;	
manuṣyeṣu—
in	human	society;	
saḥ—
he;
yuktaḥ—
is	in	the	transcendental	position;	
kṛtsna-karma-kṛt—
although
engaged	in	all	activities.TRANSLATION
One	who	sees	inaction	in	action,	and	action	in	inaction,	is	intelligent
among	men,	and	he	is	in	the	tranecendental	position,	although	engaged	in
all	sorts	of	activities.
PURPORT
A	person	acting	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	naturally	free	from	the	bonds	of
karma.	
His	activities	are	all	performed	for	Kṛṣṇa;	therefore	he	does	not	enjoy
or	suffer	any	of	the	effects	of	work.	Consequently	he	is	intelligent	in	human
society,	even	though	he	is	engaged	in	all	sorts	of	activities	for	Kṛṣṇa.	
Akarma
means	without	reaction	to	work.	The	impersonalist	ceases	fruitive	activities
out	of	fear,	so	that	the	resultant	action	may	not	be	a	stumbling	block	on	the
path	of	self-realization,	but	the	personalist	knows	rightly	his	position	as	the
eternal	servitor	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Therefore	he	engages
himself	in	the	activities	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Because	everything	is	done
for	Kṛṣṇa,	he	enjoys	only	transcendental	happiness	in	the	discharge	of	this
service.	Those	who	are	engaged	in	this	process	are	known	to	be	without	desire
for	personal	sense	gratification.	The	sense	of	eternal	servitorship	to	Kṛṣṇa
makes	one	immune	to	all	sorts	of	reactionary	elements	of	work.
TEXT	19
य ᇿ य
	
स व ᆹ
	
स म ा र ᇸ भ ा ः
	
क ा म स ङ ् क ᇺ प द ि ज ᆼ त ा ः
	
।
ᇥ ा न ा ि ᇩ न द ᇩ ध क म ा ᆼ ण ं
	
त म ा ह ु ः
	
प ि ᇯ ड त ं
	
ब ु ध ा ः
	
॥
१ ९
॥
yasya	sarve	samārambhāḥ
kāma-saṅkalpa-varjitāḥ
jñānāgni-dagdha-karmāṇaṁ
tam	āhuḥ	paṇḍitaṁ	budhāḥ
yasya—
one	whose;	
sarve—
all	sorts	of;	
samārambhāḥ—
in	all	attempts;
kāma—
desire	for	sense	gratification;	
saṅkalpa—
determination;	
varjitāḥ—
are
devoid	of;	
jñāna—
of	perfect	knowledge;	
āgni—
fire;	
dagdha—
being	burnt	by;karmāṇam—
the	performer;	
tam—
him;	
āhuḥ—
declare;	
paṇḍitam—
learned;
budhāḥ—
those	who	know.
TRANSLATION
One	is	understood	to	be	in	full	knowledge	whose	every	act	is	devoid	of
desire	for	sense	gratification.	He	is	said	by	sages	to	be	a	worker	whose
fruitive	action	is	burned	up	by	the	fire	of	perfect	knowledge.
PURPORT
Only	a	person	in	full	knowledge	can	understand	the	activities	of	a	person	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Because	the	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	devoid	of
all	kinds	of	sense-gratificatory	propensities,	it	is	to	be	understood	that	he	has
burned	up	the	reactions	of	his	work	by	perfect	knowledge	of	his	constitutional
position	as	the	eternal	servitor	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	He	is
actually	learned	who	has	attained	to	such	perfection	of	knowledge.
Development	of	this	knowledge	of	the	eternal	servitorship	of	the	Lord	is
compared	to	fire.	Such	a	fire,	once	kindled,	can	burn	up	all	kinds	of	reactions
to	work.
TEXT	20
ᇰ य ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
क म ᆼ फ ल ा स ङ ् ग ं
	
ि न ᇰ य त ृ ᇴ त ो
	
ि न र ा श ् र य ः
	
।
क म ᆼ ᇯ य ि भ प ् र व ृ ሧ ो ऽ ि प
	
न ै व
	
ि क ि ᇮ च ᇰ क र ो ि त
	
स ः
	
॥
२ ०
॥
tyaktvā	karma-phalāsaṅgaṁ
nitya-tṛpto	nirāśrayaḥ
karmaṇy	abhipravṛtto	'pi
naiva	kiñcit	karoti	saḥ
tyaktvā—
having	given	up;	
karma-phala-āsaṅgam—
attachment	for	fruitive
results;	
nitya—
always;	
tṛptaḥ—
being	satisfied;	
nirāśrayaḥ—
without	any
center;	
karmaṇi—
in	activity;	
abhipravṛttaḥ—
being	fully	engaged;	
api—
in
spite	of;	
na—
does	not;	
eva—
certainly;	
kiñcit—
anything;	
karoti—
do;	
saḥ—
he.TRANSLATION
Abandoning	all	attachment	to	the	results	of	his	activities,	ever	satisfied
and	independant,	he	performs	no	fruitive	action,	although	engaged	in	all
kinds	of	undertakings.
PURPORT
This	freedom	from	the	bondage	of	actions	is	possible	only	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	when	one	is	doing	everything	for	Kṛṣṇa.	A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious
person	acts	out	of	pure	love	for	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	and
therefore	he	has	no	attraction	for	the	results	of	the	action.	He	is	not	even
attached	to	his	personal	maintenance,	for	everything	is	left	to	Kṛṣṇa.	Nor	is	he
anxious	to	secure	things,	nor	to	protect	things	already	in	his	possession.	He
does	his	duty	to	his	best	ability	and	leaves	everything	to	Kṛṣṇa.	Such	an
unattached	person	is	always	free	from	the	resultant	reactions	of	good	and	bad;
it	is	as	though	he	were	not	doing	anything.	This	is	the	sign	of	
akarma
,	or
actions	without	fruitive	reactions.	Any	other	action,	therefore,	devoid	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	is	binding	upon	the	worker,	and	that	is	the	real	aspect	of
vikarma,	
as	explained	hereinbefore.
TEXT	21
ि न र ा श ी य ᆼ त ि च ሧ ा ᇰ म ा
	
ᇰ य ᇧ त स व ᆼ प ि र ग ् र ह ः
	
।
श ा र ी र ं
	
क े व ल ं
	
क म ᆼ
	
क ु व ᆼ ᇳ न ा ᇴ न ो ि त
	
ि क ि ᇺ ब ष म ्
	
॥
२ १
॥
nirāśīr	yata-cittātmā
tyakta-sarva-parigrahaḥ
śārīraṁ	kevalaṁ	karma
kurvan	nāpnoti	kilbiṣam
nirāśīḥ—
without	desire	for	the	results;	
yata—
controlled;	
citta-ātmā—
mind
and	intelligence;	
tyakta—
giving	up;	
sarva—
all;	
parigrahaḥ—
sense	of
proprietorship	over	all	possessions;	
śārīram—
in	keeping	body	and	soul
together;	
kevalam—
only;	
karma—
work;	
kurvan—
doing	so;	
na—
never;	
āpnoti—
does	not	acquire;	
kilbiṣam—
sinful	reactions.
TRANSLATION
Such	a	man	of	understanding	acts	with	mind	and	intelligence	perfectly
controlled,	gives	up	all	sense	of	proprietorship	over	his	possessions	and
acts	only	for	the	bare	necessities	of	life.	Thus	working,	he	is	not	affected
by	sinful	reactions.
PURPORT
A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	does	not	expect	good	or	bad	results	in	his
activities.	His	mind	and	intelligence	are	fully	controlled.	He	knows	that	he	is
part	and	parcel	of	the	Supreme,	and	therefore	the	part	played	by	him,	as	a	part
and	parcel	of	the	whole,	is	not	his	by	choice	but	is	chosen	for	him	by	the
Supreme	and	is	done	only	through	His	agency.	When	the	hand	moves,	it	does
not	move	out	of	its	own	accord,	but	by	the	endeavor	of	the	whole	body.	A
Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	is	always	dovetailed	with	the	supreme	desire,	for	he
has	no	desire	for	personal	sense	gratification.	He	moves	exactly	like	a	part	of	a
machine.	As	a	machine	part	requires	oiling	and	cleaning	for	maintenance,
similarly,	a	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	man	maintains	himself	by	his	work	just	to	remain
fit	for	action	in	the	transcendental	loving	service	of	the	Lord.	He	is	therefore
immune	to	all	the	reactions	of	his	endeavors.	Like	an	animal,	he	has	no
proprietorship	even	over	his	own	body.	A	cruel	proprietor	of	an	animal
sometimes	kills	the	animal	in	his	possession,	yet	the	animal	does	not	protest.
Nor	does	it	have	any	real	independence.	A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person,	fully
engaged	in	self-	realization,	has	very	little	time	to	falsely	possess	any	material
object.	For	maintaining	body	and	soul,	he	does	not	require	unfair	means	of
accumulating	money.	He	does	not,	therefore,	become	contaminated	by	such
material	sins.	He	is	free	from	all	reactions	to	his	actions.
TEXT	22
य द ृ ᇫ छ ा ल ा भ स ᇳ त ु ᇾ ट ो
	
ሲ ᇳ ሲ ा त ी त ो
	
ि व म ᇰ स र ः
	
।
स म ः
	
ि स ሬ ा व ि स ሬ ौ
	
च
	
क ृ ᇰ व ा ि प
	
न
	
ि न ब ᇲ य त े
	
॥
२ २
॥
yadṛcchā-lābha-santuṣṭodvandvātīto	vimatsaraḥ
samaḥ	siddhāv	asiddhau	ca
kṛtvāpi	na	nibadhyate
yadṛcchā—
out	of	its	own	accord;	
lābha—
gain;	
santuṣṭaḥ—
satisfied;
dvandva—
duality;	
atītaḥ—
surpassed;	
vimatsaraḥ—
free	from	envy;	
samaḥ—
steady;	
siddhau—
in	success;	
asiddhau—
failure;	
ca—
also;	
kṛtvā—
doing;	
api—
although;	
na—
never;	
nibadhyate—
is	affected.
TRANSLATION
He	who	is	satisfied	with	gain	which	comes	of	its	own	accord,	who	is	free
from	duality	and	does	not	envy,	who	is	steady	both	in	success	and	failure,
is	never	entangled,	although	performing	actions.
PURPORT
A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	does	not	make	much	endeavor	even	to	maintain
his	body.	He	is	satisfied	with	gains	which	are	obtained	of	their	own	accord.	He
neither	begs	nor	borrows,	but	he	labors	honestly	as	far	as	is	in	his	power,	and
is	satisfied	with	whatever	is	obtained	by	his	own	honest	labor.	He	is	therefore
independent	in	his	livelihood.	He	does	not	allow	anyone's	service	to	hamper
his	own	service	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	However,	for	the	service	of	the	Lord
he	can	participate	in	any	kind	of	action	without	being	disturbed	by	the	duality
of	the	material	world.	The	duality	of	the	material	world	is	felt	in	terms	of	heat
and	cold,	or	misery	and	happiness.	A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	is	above	duality
because	he	does	not	hesitate	to	act	in	any	way	for	the	satisfaction	of	Kṛṣṇa.
Therefore	he	is	steady	both	in	success	and	in	failure.	These	signs	are	visible
when	one	is	fully	in	transcendental	knowledge.
TEXT	23
ग त स ङ ् ग ᇿ य
	
म ु ᇧ त ᇿ य
	
ᇥ ा न ा व ि ᇿ थ त च े त स ः
	
।
य ᇥ ा य ा च र त ः
	
क म ᆼ
	
स म ग ् र ं
	
प ् र ि व ल ी य त े
	
॥
२ ३
॥
gata-saṅgasya	muktasyajñānāvasthita-cetasaḥ
yajñāyācarataḥ	karma
samagraṁ	pravilīyate
gata-saṅgasya—
unattached	to	the	modes	of	material	nature;	
muktasya—
of
the	liberated;	
jñāna-avasthita—
situated	in	transcendence;	
cetasaḥ—
of	such
wisdom;	
yajñāya—
for	the	sake	of	Yajña	(Kṛṣṇa);	
ācarataḥ—
so	acting;	
karma
—
work;	
samagram—
in	total;	
pravilīyate—
merges	entirely.
TRANSLATION
The	work	of	a	man	who	is	unattached	to	the	modes	of	material	nature
and	who	is	fully	situated	in	transcendental	knowledge	merges	entirely
into	transcendence.
PURPORT
Becoming	fully	Kṛṣṇa	conscious,	one	is	freed	from	all	dualities	and	thus	is
free	from	the	contaminations	of	the	material	modes.	He	can	become	liberated
because	he	knows	his	constitutional	position	in	relationship	with	Kṛṣṇa;	and
thus	his	mind	cannot	be	drawn	from	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Consequently,
whatever	he	does,	he	does	for	Kṛṣṇa,	who	is	the	primeval	Viṣṇu.	Therefore,	all
his	works	are	technically	sacrifices	because	sacrifice	involves	satisfying	the
Supreme	Person,	Kṛṣṇa.	The	resultant	reactions	to	all	such	work	certainly
merge	into	transcendence,	and	one	does	not	suffer	material	effects.
TEXT	24
ब ् र ቊ ा प ᆼ ण ं
	
ब ् र ቊ
	
ह ि व ब ् र ᆼ ቊ ा ᇩ न ौ
	
ब ् र ቊ ण ा
	
ह ु त म ्
	
।
ब ् र ቊ ै व
	
त े न
	
ग ᇳ त ᇼ य ं
	
ब ् र ቊ
	
क म ᆼ
	
स म ा ि ध न ा
	
॥
२ ४
॥
brahmārpaṇaṁ	brahma	havir
brahmāgnau	brahmaṇā	hutam
brahmaiva	tena	gantavyaṁ
brahma-karma-samādhinābrahma—
spiritual	nature;	
arpaṇam—
contribution;	
brahma—
the	Supreme;
haviḥ—
butter;	
brahma—
spiritual;	
agnau—
in	the	fire	of	consummation;
brahmaṇā—
by	the	spirit	soul;	
hutam—
offered;	
brahma—
spiritual	kingdom;
eva—
certainly;	
tena—
by	him;	
gantavyam—
to	be	reached;	
brahma—
spiritual;
karma—
activities;	
samādhinā—
by	complete	absorption.
TRANSLATION
A	person	who	is	fully	absorbed	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	sure	to	attain
the	spiritual	kingdom	because	of	his	full	contribution	to	spiritual
activities,	in	which	the	consummation	is	absolute	and	that	which	is
offered	is	of	the	same	spiritual	nature.
PURPORT
How	activities	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	can	lead	one	ultimately	to	the
spiritual	goal	is	described	here.	There	are	various	activities	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	and	all	of	them	will	be	described	in	the	following	verses.	But,
for	the	present,	just	the	principle	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	described.	A
conditioned	soul,	entangled	in	material	contamination,	is	sure	to	act	in	the
material	atmosphere,	and	yet	he	has	to	get	out	of	such	an	environment.	The
process	by	which	the	conditioned	soul	can	get	out	of	the	material	atmosphere
is	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	For	example,	a	patient	who	is	suffering	from	a
disorder	of	the	bowels	due	to	overindulgence	in	milk	products	is	cured	by
another	milk	product,	namely	curds.	The	materially	absorbed	conditioned	soul
can	be	cured	by	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	as	set	forth	here	in	the	
Gītā
.	This	process
is	generally	known	as	
yajña,	
or	activities	(sacrifices)	simply	meant	for	the
satisfaction	of	Viṣṇu	or	Kṛṣṇa.	The	more	the	activities	of	the	material	world
are	performed	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	or	for	Viṣṇu	only,	the	more	the
atmosphere	becomes	spiritualized	by	complete	absorption.	Brahman	means
spiritual.	The	Lord	is	spiritual,	and	the	rays	of	His	transcendental	body	are
called	
brahmajyoti,	
His	spiritual	effulgence.	Everything	that	exists	is	situated
in	that	
brahmajyoti,	
but	when	the	
jyoti
	is	covered	by	illusion	
(māyā)	
or	sense
gratification,	it	is	called	material.	This	material	veil	can	be	removed	at	once	by
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness;	thus	the	offering	for	the	sake	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,
the	consuming	agent	of	such	an	offering	or	contribution,	the	process	of
consumption,	the	contributor,	and	the	result	are–all	combined	together–Brahman,	or	the	Absolute	Truth.	The	Absolute	Truth	covered	by	
māyā
	is
called	matter.	Matter	dovetailed	for	the	cause	of	the	Absolute	Truth	regains	its
spiritual	quality.	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	the	process	of	converting	the	illusory
consciousness	into	Brahman,	or	the	Supreme.	When	the	mind	is	fully
absorbed	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	it	is	said	to	be	in	
samādhi,	
or	trance.
Anything	done	in	such	transcendental	consciousness	is	called	
yajña,	
or
sacrifice	for	the	Absolute.	In	that	condition	of	spiritual	consciousness,	the
contributor,	the	contribution,	the	consumption,	the	performer	or	leader	of	the
performance,	and	the	result	or	ultimate	gain–everything–becomes	one	in	the
Absolute,	the	Supreme	Brahman.	That	is	the	method	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
TEXT	25
द ै व म े व ा प र े
	
य ᇥ ं
	
य ो ि ग न ः
	
प य ु ᆼ प ा स त े
	
।
ब ् र ቊ ा ᇩ न ा व प र े
	
य ᇥ ं
	
य ᇥ े न ै व ो प ज ु ቍ ि त
	
॥
२ ५
॥
daivam	evāpare	yajñaṁ
yoginaḥ	paryupāsate
brahmāgnāv	apare	yajñaṁ
yajñenaivopajuhvati
daivam—
in	worshiping	the	demigods;	
eva—
like	this;	
apare—
some;	
yajñam
—
sacrifices;	
yoginaḥ—
the	mystics;	
paryupāsate—
worship	perfectly;	
brahma
—
the	Absolute	Truth;	
agnau—
in	the	fire	of;	
apare—
others;	
yajñam—
sacrifice;
yajñena—
by	sacrifice;	
eva—
thus;	
upajuhvati—
worship.
TRANSLATION
Some	yogīs	perfectly	worship	the	demigods	by	offering	different
sacrifices	to	them,	and	some	of	them	offer	sacrffices	in	the	fire	of	the
Supreme	Brahman.
PURPORT
As	described	above,	a	person	engaged	in	discharging	duties	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	also	called	a	perfect	
yogī
	or	a	first-class	mystic.	But	there	areothers	also,	who	perform	similar	sacrifices	in	the	worship	of	demigods,	and
still	others	who	sacrifice	to	the	Supreme	Brahman,	or	the	impersonal	feature
of	the	Supreme	Lord.	So	there	are	different	kinds	of	sacrifices	in	terms	of
different	categories.	Such	different	categories	of	sacrifice	by	different	types	of
performers	only	superficially	demark	varieties	of	sacrifice.	Factual	sacrifice
means	to	satisfy	the	Supreme	Lord,	Viṣṇu,	who	is	also	known	as	
Yajña.
	All
the	different	varieties	of	sacrifice	can	be	placed	within	two	primary	divisions:
namely,	sacrifice	of	worldly	possessions	and	sacrifice	in	pursuit	of
transcendental	knowledge.	Those	who	are	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	sacrifice	all
material	possessions	for	the	satisfaction	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	while	others,
who	want	some	temporary	material	happiness,	sacrifice	their	material
possessions	to	satisfy	demigods	such	as	Indra,	the	sun-god,	etc.	And	others,
who	are	impersonalists,	sacrifice	their	identity	by	merging	into	the	existence
of	impersonal	Brahman.	The	demigods	are	powerful	living	entities	appointed
by	the	Supreme	Lord	for	the	maintenance	and	supervision	of	all	material
functions	like	the	heating,	watering	and	lighting	of	the	universe.	Those	who
are	interested	in	material	benefits	worship	the	demigods	by	various	sacrifices
according	to	the	Vedic	rituals.	They	are	called	
bahv-īśvara-vādī,	
or	believers
in	many	gods.	But	others,	who	worship	the	impersonal	feature	of	the	Absolute
Truth	and	regard	the	forms	of	the	demigods	as	temporary,	sacrifice	their
individual	selves	in	the	supreme	fire	and	thus	end	their	individual	existences
by	merging	into	the	existence	of	the	Supreme.	Such	impersonalists	spend	their
time	in	philosophical	speculation	to	understand	the	transcendental	nature	of
the	Supreme.	In	other	words,	the	fruitive	workers	sacrifice	their	material
possessions	for	material	enjoyment,	whereas	the	impersonalist	sacrifices	his
material	designations	with	a	view	to	merging	into	the	existence	of	the
Supreme.	For	the	impersonalist,	the	fire	altar	of	sacrifice	is	the	Supreme
Brahman,	and	the	offering	is	the	self	being	consumed	by	the	fire	of	Brahman.
The	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person,	like	Arjuna,	however,	sacrifices	everything	for
the	satisfaction	of	Kṛṣṇa,	and	thus	all	his	material	possessions	as	well	as	his
own	self
—
everything
—
is	sacrificed	for	Kṛṣṇa.	Thus,	he	is	the	first-class	
yogī
;
but	he	does	not	lose	his	individual	existence.
TEXT	26
श ् र ो त ् र ा द ी न ी ि ᇳ द ् र य ा ᇯ य ᇳ य े
	
स ं य म ा ि ᇩ न ष ु
	
ज ु ቍ ि त
	
।
श ᇶ द ा द ी ि ᇳ व ष य ा न ᇳ य
	
इ ि ᇳ द ् र य ा ि ᇩ न ष ु
	
ज ु ቍ ि त
	
॥
२ ६
॥śrotrādīnīndriyāṇy	anye
saṁyamāgniṣu	juhvati
śabdādīn	viṣayān	anya
indriyāgniṣu	juhvati
śrotra-ādīni—
hearing	process;	
indriyāṇi—
senses;	
anye—
others;	
saṁyama—
of	restraint;	
agniṣu—
in	the	fire;	
juhvati—
offers;	
śabda-ādīn—
sound	vibration,
etc.;	
viṣayān—
objects	of	sense	gratification;	
anye—
others:	
indriya—
of	sense
organs;	
agniṣu—
in	the	fire;	
juhvati—
sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
Some	of	them	sacrifice	the	hearing	process	and	the	senses	in	the	fire	of
the	controlled	mind,	and	others	sacrifice	the	objects	of	the	senses,	such	as
sound,	in	the	fire	of	sacrifice.
PURPORT
The	four	divisions	of	human	life,	namely	the	
brahmacārī,	
the	
gṛhastha,	
the
vānaprastha,	
and	the	
sannyāsī,	
are	all	meant	to	help	men	become	perfect
yogīs
	or	transcendentalists.	Since	human	life	is	not	meant	for	our	enjoying
sense	gratification	like	the	animals,	the	four	orders	of	human	life	are	so
arranged	that	one	may	become	perfect	in	spiritual	life.	The	
brahmacārīs,	
or
students	under	the	care	of	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master,	control	the	mind	by
abstaining	from	sense	gratification.	They	are	referred	to	in	this	verse	as
sacrificing	the	hearing	process	and	the	senses	in	the	fire	of	the	controlled
mind.	A	
brahmacārī	
hears	only	words	concerning	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness;
hearing	is	the	basic	principle	for	understanding,	and	therefore	the	pure
brahmacārī	
engages	fully	in	
harer	nāmānukīrtanam—
chanting	and	hearing
the	glories	of	the	Lord.	He	restrains	himself	from	the	vibrations	of	material
sounds,	and	his	hearing	is	engaged	in	the	transcendental	sound	vibration	of
Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa.	Similarly,	the	householders,	who	have	some	license
for	sense	gratification,	perform	such	acts	with	great	restraint.	Sex	life,
intoxication	and	meat	eating	are	general	tendencies	of	human	society,	but	a
regulated	householder	does	not	indulge	in	unrestricted	sex	life	and	other	sense
gratifications.	Marriage	on	principles	of	religious	life	is	therefore	current	in	all
civilized	human	society	because	that	is	the	way	for	restricted	sex	life.	Thisrestricted,	unattached	sex	life	is	also	a	kind	of	
yajña
	because	the	restricted
householder	sacrifices	his	general	tendency	toward	sense	gratification	for
higher	transcendental	life.
TEXT	27
स व ा ᆼ ण ी ि ᇳ द ् र य क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
प ् र ा ण क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
च ा प र े
	
।
आ ᇰ म स ं य म य ो ग ा ᇩ न ौ
	
ज ु ቍ ि त
	
ᇥ ा न द ी ि प त े
	
॥
२ ७
॥
sarvāṇīndriya-karmāṇi
prāṇa-karmāṇi	cāpare
ātma-saṁyama-yogāgnau
juhvati	jñāna-dīpite
sarvāṇi—
all;	
indriya—
senses;	
karmāṇi—
functions;	
prāṇa-karmāṇi
—
functions	of	the	life	breath;	
ca—
also;	
apare—
others;	
ātma-saṁyama
—
controlling	the	mind;	
yoga—
linking	process;	
agnau—
in	the	fire	of;	
juhvati
—
offers;	
jñāna-dīpite—
because	of	the	urge	for	self-realization.
TRANSLATION
Those	who	are	interested	in	self-realization,	in	terms	of	mind	and	sense
control,	offer	the	functions	of	all	the	senses,	as	well	as	the	vital	force
[breath],	as	oblations	into	the	fire	of	the	controlled	mind.
PURPORT
The	
yoga	
system	conceived	by	Patañjali	is	referred	to	herein.	In	the	
Yoga-
sūtra
	of	Patañjali,	the	soul	is	called	
pratyag-ātmā
	and	
parag-ātmā.
	As	long	as
the	soul	is	attached	to	sense	enjoyment,	it	is	called	
parag-ātmā.	
The	soul	is
subjected	to	the	functions	of	ten	kinds	of	air	at	work	within	the	body,	and	this
is	perceived	through	the	breathing	system.	The	Pātañjala	system	of	
yoga
instructs	one	on	how	to	control	the	functions	of	the	body's	air	in	a	technical
manner	so	that	ultimately	all	the	functions	of	the	air	within	become	favorable
for	purifying	the	soul	of	material	attachment.	According	to	this	
yoga	
system,
pratyag	ātmā	
is	the	ultimate	goal.	This	
pratyag	ātmā	
is	a	withdrawal	fromactivities	in	matter.	The	senses	interact	with	the	sense	objects,	like	the	ear	for
hearing,	eyes	for	seeing,	nose	for	smelling,	tongue	for	tasting,	hand	for
touching,	and	all	of	them	are	thus	engaged	in	activities	outside	the	self.	They
are	called	the	functions	of	the	
prāṇa-vāyu.	
The	
apāna-vāyu	
goes	downwards,
vyāna-vāyu	
acts	to	shrink	and	expand,	
samāna-vāyu	
adjusts	equilibrium,
udāna-vāyu	
goes	upwards–and	when	one	is	enlightened,	one	engages	all	these
in	searching	for	self-realization.
TEXT	28
द ् र ᇼ य य ᇥ ा ᇿ त प ो य ᇥ ा
	
य ो ग य ᇥ ा ᇿ त थ ा प र े
	
।
ᇿ व ा ᇲ य ा य ᇥ ा न य ᇥ ा ᇽ च
	
य त य ः
	
स ं ि श त व ् र त ा ः
	
॥
२ ८
॥
dravya-yajñās	tapo-yajñā
yoga-yajñās	tathāpare
svādhyāya-jñāna-yajñāś	ca
yatayaḥ	saṁśita-vratāḥ
dravya-yajñāḥ—
sacrificing	one's	possessions;	
tapo-yajñāḥ—
sacrifice	in
austerities;	
yoga-yajñāḥ—
sacrifice	in	eightfold	mysticism;	
tathā—
thus;	
apare
—
others;	
svādhyāya—
sacrifice	in	the	study	of	the	
Vedas;	jñāna-	yajñāḥ
—
sacrifice	in	advancement	of	transcendental	knowledge;	
ca—
also;	
yatayaḥ
—
enlightened;	
saṁśita—
taken	to	strict;	
vratāḥ-vows.
TRANSLATION
There	are	others	who,	enlightened	by	sacrificing	their	material
possessions	in	severe	austerities,	take	strict	vows	and	practice	the	yoga	of
eightfold	mysticism,	and	others	study	the	Vedas	for	the	advancement	of
transcendental	knowledge.
PURPORT
These	sacrifices	may	be	fitted	into	various	divisions.	There	are	persons	who
are	sacrificing	their	possessions	in	the	form	of	various	kinds	of	charities.	In
India,	the	rich	mercantile	community	or	princely	orders	open	various	kinds	ofcharitable	institutions	like	
dharmaśālā,	anna-kṣetra,	atithi-śālā,	anathalaya,
vidyāpīṭha,	
etc.	In	other	countries,	too,	there	are	many	hospitals,	old	age
homes	and	similar	charitable	foundations	meant	for	distributing	food,
education	and	medical	treatment	free	to	the	poor.	All	these	charitable	activities
are	called	
dravyamaya-yajña.	
There	are	others	who,	for	higher	elevation	in
life	or	for	promotion	to	higher	planets	within	the	universe,	voluntarily	accept
many	kinds	of	austerities	such	as	
candrāyana	
and	
cāturmāsya.	
These
processes	entail	severe	vows	for	conducting	life	under	certain	rigid	rules.	For
example,	under	the	
cāturmāsya	
vow	the	candidate	does	not	shave	for	four
months	during	the	year	(July	to	October),	he	does	not	eat	certain	foods,	does
not	eat	twice	in	a	day	and	does	not	leave	home.	Such	sacrifice	of	the	comforts
of	life	is	called	
tapomaya-yajña.	
There	are	still	others	who	engage	themselves
in	different	kinds	of	mystic	
yogas	
like	the	Patañjali	system	(for	merging	into
the	existence	of	the	Absolute),	or	
haṭha-yoga	
or	
aṣṭāṅga-yoga	
(for	particular
perfections).	And	some	travel	to	all	the	sanctified	places	of	pilgrimage.	All
these	practices	are	called	
yoga-yajña,	
sacrifice	for	a	certain	type	of	perfection
in	the	material	world.	There	are	others	who	engage	themselves	in	the	studies
of	different	Vedic	literatures,	specifically	the	
Upaniṣads	
and	
Vedānta-sūtras,
or	the	
sāṅkhya	
philosophy.	All	of	these	are	called	
svādhyāya-yajña,	
or
engagement	in	the	sacrifice	of	studies.	All	these	
yogīs
	are	faithfully	engaged
in	different	types	of	sacrifice	and	are	seeking	a	higher	status	of	life.	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	is,	however,	different	from	these	because	it	is	the	direct	service
of	the	Supreme	Lord.	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	cannot	be	attained	by	any	one	of
the	above-mentioned	types	of	sacrifices	but	can	be	attained	only	by	the	mercy
of	the	Lord	and	His	bona	fide	devotee.	Therefore,	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is
transcendental.
TEXT	29
अ प ा न े
	
ज ु ቍ ि त
	
प ् र ा ण ं
	
प ् र ा ण े ऽ प ा न ं
	
त थ ा प र े
	
।
प ् र ा ण ा प ा न ग त ी
	
ኄ द ् ᇲ व ा
	
प ् र ा ण ा य ा म प र ा य ण ा ः
	
।
	
अ प र े
	
ि न य त ा ह ा र ा ः
	
प ् र ा ण ा ᇳ प ् र ा ण े ष ु
	
ज ु ቍ ि त
	
॥
२ ९
॥
apāne	juhvati	prāṇaṁ
prāṇe	'pānaṁ	tathāpare
prāṇāpāna-gatī	ruddhvā
prāṇāyāma-parāyaṇāḥapare	niyatāhārāḥ
prāṇān	prāṇeṣu	juhvati
apāne—
air	which	acts	downward;	
juhvati—
offers;	
prāṇam—
air	which	acts
outward;	
prāṇe—
in	the	air	going	outward;	
apānam—
air	going	downward;
tathā—
as	also;	
apare—
others;	
prāṇa—
air	going	outward;	
apāna—
air	going
downward;	
gatī—
movement;	
ruddhvā—
checking;	
prāṇāyāma—
trance
induced	by	stopping	all	breathing;	
parāyaṇāḥ—
so	inclined;	
apare—
others;
niyata—
controlled;	
āhārāḥ—
eating;	
prāṇān—
outgoing	air;	
prāṇeṣu—
in	the
outgoing	air;	
juhvati—
sacrifices.
TRANSLATION
And	there	are	even	others	who	are	inclined	to	the	process	of	breath
restraint	to	remain	in	trance,	and	they	practice	stopping	the	movement	of
the	outgoing	breath	into	the	incoming,	and	incoming	breath	into	the
outgoing,	and	thus	at	last	remain	in	trance,	stopping	all	breathing.	Some
of	them,	curtailing	the	eating	process,	offer	the	outgoing	breath	into	itself,
as	a	sacrifice.
PURPORT
This	system	of	
yoga	
for	controlling	the	breathing	process	is	called
prāṇāyāma,	
and	in	the	beginning	it	is	practiced	in	the	
haṭha-yoga	
system
through	different	sitting	postures.	All	of	these	processes	are	recommended	for
controlling	the	senses	and	for	advancement	in	spiritual	realization.	This
practice	involves	controlling	the	air	within	the	body	to	enable	simultaneous
passage	in	opposite	directions.	The	
apāna	
air	goes	downward,	and	the	
prāṇa
air	goes	up.	The	
prāṇāyāma	yogī	
practices	breathing	the	opposite	way	until
the	currents	are	neutralized	into	
pūraka,	
equilibrium.	Similarly,	when	the
exhaled	breathing	is	offered	to	inhaled	breathing,	it	is	called	
recaka.	
When
both	air	currents	are	completely	stopped,	it	is	called	
kumbhaka-yoga.
	By
practice	of	
kumbhaka-yoga,	
the	
yogīs
	increase	the	duration	of	life	by	many,
many	years.	A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person,	however,	being	always	situated	in	the
transcendental	loving	service	of	the	Lord,	automatically	becomes	the
controller	of	the	senses.	His	senses,	being	always	engaged	in	the	service	of
Kṛṣṇa,	have	no	chance	of	becoming	otherwise	engaged.	So	at	the	end	of	life,he	is	naturally	transferred	to	the	transcendental	plane	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa;
consequently	he	makes	no	attempt	to	increase	his	longevity.	He	is	at	once
raised	to	the	platform	of	liberation.	A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	begins	from	the
transcendental	stage,	and	he	is	constantly	in	that	consciousness.	Therefore,
there	is	no	falling	down,	and	ultimately	he	enters	into	the	abode	of	the	Lord
without	delay.	The	practice	of	reduced	eating	is	automatically	done	when	one
eats	only	Kṛṣṇa	
prasādam,	
or	food	which	is	offered	first	to	the	Lord.	Reducing
the	eating	process	is	very	helpful	in	the	matter	of	sense	control.	And	without
sense	control	there	is	no	possibility	of	getting	out	of	the	material
entanglement.
TEXT	30
स व ᆹ ऽ ᇴ य े त े
	
य ᇥ ि व द ो
	
य ᇥ ᇤ ि प त क ᇺ म ष ा ः
	
।
य ᇥ
	
ि श ᇾ ट ा म ृ त
	
भ ु ज ो
	
य ा ि ᇳ त
	
ब ् र ቊ ा
	
स न ा त न म ्
	
॥
३ ०
॥
sarve	'py	ete	yajña-vido
yajña-kṣapita-kalmaṣāḥ
yajña-śiṣṭāmṛta-bhujo
yānti	brahma	sanātanam
sarve—
all;	
api—
although	apparently	different;	
ete—
all	these;	
yajña-vidaḥ
—
conversant	with	the	purpose	of	performing;	
yajña—
sacrifices;	
kṣapita—
being	cleansed	of	the	result	of	such	performances;	
kalmaṣāḥ—
sinful	reactions;
yajña-śiṣṭa—
as	a	result	of	such	performances	of	
yajña
;	
amṛta-bhujaḥ—
those
who	have	tasted	such	nectar;	
yānti—
do	approach;	
brahma—
the	supreme;
sanātanam—
eternal	atmosphere.
TRANSLATION
All	these	performers	who	know	the	meaning	of	sacrifice	become
cleansed	of	sinful	reaction,	and,	having	tasted	the	nectar	of	the	remnants
of	such	sacrifice,	they	go	to	the	supreme	eternal	atmosphere.
PURPORTFrom	the	foregoing	explanation	of	differents	types	of	sacrifice	(namely
sacrifice	of	one's	possessions,	study	of	the	
Vedas
	or	philosophical	doctrines,
and	performance	of	the	
yoga	
system),	it	is	found	that	the	common	aim	of	all	is
to	control	the	senses.	Sense	gratification	is	the	root	cause	of	material
existence;	therefore,	unless	and	until	one	is	situated	on	a	platform	apart	from
sense	gratification,	there	is	no	chance	of	being	elevated	to	the	eternal	platform
of	full	knowledge,	full	bliss	and	full	life.	This	platform	is	in	the	eternal
atmosphere,	or	Brahman	atmosphere.	All	the	above-mentioned	sacrifices	help
one	to	become	cleansed	of	the	sinful	reactions	of	material	existence.	By	this
advancement	in	life,	one	not	only	becomes	happy	and	opulent	in	this	life,	but
also,	at	the	end,	he	enters	into	the	eternal	kingdom	of	God,	either	merging	into
the	impersonal	Brahman	or	associating	with	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	31
न ा य ं
	
ल ो क ो ऽ ᇿ ᇰ य य ᇥ ᇿ य
	
क ु त ो ऽ ᇳ य ः
	
क ु ኄ स ሧ म
	
॥
३ १
॥
nāyaṁ	loko	'sty	ayajñasya
kuto	'nyaḥ	kuru-sattama
na—
never;	
ayam—
this;	
lokaḥ—
planet;	
asti—
there	is;	
ayajñasya—
of	the
foolish;	
kutaḥ—
where	is;	
anyaḥ—
the	other;	
kuru-sattama
—O	best	amongst
the	Kurus.
TRANSLATION
O	best	of	the	Kuru	dynasty,	without	sacrifice	one	can	never	live	happily
on	this	planet	or	in	this	life:	what	then	of	the	next?
PURPORT
Whatever	form	of	material	existence	one	is	in,	one	is	invariably	ignorant	of
his	real	situation.	In	other	words,	existence	in	the	material	world	is	due	to	the
multiple	reactions	to	our	sinful	lives.	Ignorance	is	the	cause	of	sinful	life,	and
sinful	life	is	the	cause	of	one's	dragging	on	in	material	existence.	The	humanform	of	life	is	the	only	loophole	by	which	one	may	get	out	of	this
entanglement.	The	
Vedas,	
therefore,	give	us	a	chance	for	escape	by	pointing
out	the	paths	of	religion,	economic	comfort,	regulated	sense	gratification	and,
at	last,	the	means	to	get	out	of	the	miserable	condition	entirely.	The	path	of
religion,	or	the	different	kinds	of	sacrifice	recommended	above,	automatically
solves	our	economic	problems.	By	performance	of	
yajña	
we	can	have	enough
food,	enough	milk,	etc.
—
even	if	there	is	a	so-called	increase	of	population.
When	the	body	is	fully	supplied,	naturally	the	next	stage	is	to	satisfy	the
senses.	The	
Vedas	
prescribe,	therefore,	sacred	marriage	for	regulated	sense
gratification.	Thereby	one	is	gradually	elevated	to	the	platform	of	release	from
material	bondage,	and	the	highest	perfection	of	liberated	life	is	to	associate
with	the	Supreme	Lord.	Perfection	is	achieved	by	performance	of	
yajña
(sacrifice),	as	described	above.	Now,	if	a	person	is	not	inclined	to	perform
yajña	
according	to	the	
Vedas,	
how	can	he	expect	a	happy	life?	There	are
different	grades	of	material	comforts	in	different	heavenly	planets,	and	in	all
cases	there	is	immense	happiness	for	persons	engaged	in	different	kinds	of
yajña.	
But	the	highest	kind	of	happiness	that	a	man	can	achieve	is	to	be
promoted	to	the	spiritual	planets	by	practice	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	A	life	of
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	therefore	the	solution	to	all	the	problems	of	material
existence.
TEXT	32
ए व ं
	
ब ह ु ि व ध ा
	
य ᇥ ा
	
ि व त त ा
	
ब ् र ቊ ण ो
	
म ु ख े
	
।
क म ᆼ ज ा ि ᇳ व द ् ि ध
	
त ा ᇳ स व ा ᆼ न े व ं
	
ᇥ ा ᇰ व ा
	
ि व म ो ቎ य स े
	
॥
३ २
॥
evaṁ	bahu-vidhā	yajñā
vitatā	brahmaṇo	mukhe
karma-jān	viddhi	tān	sarvān
evaṁ	jñātvā	vimokṣyase
evam—
thus;	
bahu-vidhāḥ—
various	kinds	of;	
yajñāḥ—
sacrifices;	
vitatāḥ—
widespread;	
brahmaṇaḥ—
of	the	
Vedas;	mukhe—
in	the	face	of;	
karma-jān—
born	of	work;	
viddhi—
you	should	know;	
tān—
them;	
sarvān—
all;	
evam—
thus;
jñātvā—
knowing;	
vimokṣyase—
be	liberated.
TRANSLATIONAll	these	different	types	of	sacrifice	are	approved	by	the	Vedas,	and	all
of	them	are	born	of	different	types	of	work.	Knowing	them	as	such,	you
will	become	liberated.
PURPORT
Different	types	of	sacrifice,	as	discussed	above,	are	mentioned	in	the	
Vedas
to	suit	the	different	types	of	worker.	Because	men	are	so	deeply	absorbed	in
the	bodily	concept,	these	sacrifices	are	so	arranged	that	one	can	work	either
with	the	body,	the	mind,	or	the	intelligence.	But	all	of	them	are	recommended
for	ultimately	bringing	about	liberation	from	the	body.	This	is	confirmed	by
the	Lord	herewith	from	His	own	mouth.
TEXT	33
श ् र े य ा ᇳ द ् र ᇼ य म य ा ሱ ᇥ ा ᇬ ᇥ ा न य ᇥ ः
	
प र ᇳ त प
	
।
स व ᆾ
	
क म ा ᆼ ि ख ल ं
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
ᇥ ा न े
	
प ि र स म ा ᇴ य त े
	
॥
३ ३
॥
śreyān	dravyamayād	yajñāj
jñāna-yajñaḥ	parantapa
sarvaṁ	karmākhilaṁ	pārtha
jñāne	parisamāpyate
śreyān—
greater;	
dravyamayāt—
than	the	sacrifice	of	material	possessions;
yajñāt—
knowledge;	
jñāna-yajñaḥ—
sacrifice	in	knowledge;	
parantapa—
O
chastiser	of	the	enemy;	
sarvam—
all;	
karma—
activities;	
akhilam—
in	totality;
pārtha—
O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
jñāne—
in	knowledge;	
parisamāpyate—
ends	in.
TRANSLATION
O	chastiser	of	the	enemy,	the	sacrifice	of	knowledge	is	greater	than	the
sacrifice	of	material	possessions.	O	son	of	Pṛthā,	after	all,	the	sacrifice	of
work	culminates	in	transcendental	knowledge.
PURPORTThe	purpose	of	all	sacrifices	is	to	arrive	at	the	status	of	complete
knowledge,	then	to	gain	release	from	material	miseries,	and,	ultimately,	to
engage	in	loving	transcendental	service	to	the	Supreme	Lord	(Kṛṣṇa
consciousness).	Nonetheless,	there	is	a	mystery	about	all	these	different
activities	of	sacrifice,	and	one	should	know	this	mystery.	Sacrifices	sometimes
take	different	forms	according	to	the	particular	faith	of	the	performer.	When
one's	faith	reaches	the	stage	of	transcendental	knowledge,	the	performer	of
sacrifices	should	be	considered	more	advanced	than	those	who	simply
sacrifice	material	possessions	without	such	knowledge,	for	without	attainment
of	knowledge,	sacrifices	remain	on	the	material	platform	and	bestow	no
spiritual	benefit.	Real	knowledge	culminates	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	the
highest	stage	of	transcendental	knowledge.	Without	the	elevation	of
knowledge,	sacrifices	are	simply	material	activities.	When,	however,	they	are
elevated	to	the	level	of	transcendental	knowledge,	all	such	activities	enter	onto
the	spiritual	platform.	Depending	on	differences	in	consciousness,	sacrificial
activities	are	sometimes	called	
karma-	kāṇḍa,	
fruitive	activities,	and
sometimes	
jñāna-kāṇḍa,	
knowledge	in	the	pursuit	of	truth.	It	is	better	when
the	end	is	knowledge.
TEXT	34
त द ् ि व द ् ि ध
	
प ् र ि ण प ा त े न
	
प ि र प ् र ᇽ न े न
	
स े व य ा
	
।
उ प द े ቎ य ि ᇳ त
	
त े
	
ᇥ ा न ं
	
ᇥ ा ि न न ᇿ त ᇰ ᇰ व द ि श ᆼ न ः
	
॥
३ ४
॥
tad	viddhi	praṇipātena
paripraśnena	sevayā
upadekṣyanti	te	jñānaṁ
jñāninas	tattva-darśinaḥ
tat—
that	knowledge	of	different	sacrifices;	
viddhi—
try	to	understand;
praṇipātena—
by	approaching	a	spiritual	master;	
paripraśnena—
by
submissive	inquiries;	
sevayā—
by	the	rendering	of	service;	
upadekṣyanti
—
initiate;	
te—
unto	you;	
jñānam—
knowledge;	
jñāninaḥ—
the	self-realized;
tattva—
truth;	
darśinaḥ—
the	seers.
TRANSLATIONJust	try	to	learn	the	truth	by	approaching	a	spiritual	master.	Inquire
from	him	submissively	and	render	service	unto	him.	The	self-realized	soul
can	impart	knowledge	unto	you	because	he	has	seen	the	truth.
PURPORT
The	path	of	spiritual	realization	is	undoubtedly	difficult.	The	Lord	therefore
advises	us	to	approach	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master	in	the	line	of	disciplic
succession	from	the	Lord	Himself.	No	one	can	be	a	bona	fides	piritual	master
without	following	this	principle	of	disciplic	succession.	The	Lord	is	the
original	spiritual	master,	and	a	person	in	the	disciplic	succession	can	convey
the	message	of	the	Lord	as	it	is	to	his	disciple.	No	one	can	be	spiritually
realized	by	manufacturing	his	own	process,	as	is	the	fashion	of	the	foolish
pretenders.	The	
Bhāgavatam	
says:	
dharmaṁ	hi	sākṣād-bhagavat-praṇītam
–
the	path	of	religion	is	directly	enunciated	by	the	Lord.	Therefore,	mental
speculation	or	dry	arguments	cannot	help	one	progress	in	spiritual	life.	One
has	to	approach	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master	to	receive	the	knowledge.	Such	a
spiritual	master	should	be	accepted	in	full	surrender,	and	one	should	serve	the
spiritual	master	like	a	menial	servant,	without	false	prestige.	Satisfaction	of
the	self-realized	spiritual	master	is	the	secret	of	advancement	in	spiritual	life.
Inquiries	and	submission	constitute	the	proper	combination	for	spiritual
understanding.	Unless	there	is	submission	and	service,	inquiries	from	the
learned	spiritual	master	will	not	be	effective.	One	must	be	able	to	pass	the	test
of	the	spiritual	master,	and	when	he	sees	the	genuine	desire	of	the	disciple,	he
automatically	blesses	the	disciple	with	genuine	spiritual	understanding.	In	this
verse,	both	blind	following	and	absurd	inquiries	are	condemned.	One	should
not	only	hear	submissively	from	the	spiritual	master,	but	one	must	also	get	a
clear	understanding	from	him,	in	submission	and	service	and	inquiries.	A	bona
fide	spiritual	master	is	by	nature	very	kind	toward	the	disciple.	Therefore
when	the	student	is	submissive	and	is	always	ready	to	render	service,	the
reciprocation	of	knowledge	and	inquiries	becomes	perfect.
TEXT	35
य ᇬ ᇥ ा ᇰ व ा
	
न
	
प ु न म ो ᆼ ह म े व ं
	
य ा ᇿ य ि स
	
प ा ᇯ ड व
	
।
य े न
	
भ ू त ा ᇳ य श े ष े ि ण
	
द ् र ቎ य ᇿ य ा ᇰ म ᇳ य थ ो
	
म ि य
	
॥
३ ५
॥yaj	jñātvā	na	punar	moham
evaṁ	yāsyasi	pāṇḍava
yena	bhūtāny	aśeṣāṇi
drakṣyasy	ātmany	atho	mayi
yat—
which;	
jñātvā—
knowing;	
na—
never;	
punaḥ—
again;	
moham—
illusion;
evam—
like	this;	
yāsyasi—
you	shall	go;
	pāṇḍava—
O	son	of	Pāṇḍu;	
yena—
by
which;	
bhūtāni—
all	living	entities;	
aśesāṇi—
totally;	
drakṣyasi—
you	will	see;
ātmani—
in	the	Supreme	Soul;	
atho—
or	in	other	words;	
mayi—
in	Me.
TRANSLATION
And	when	you	have	thus	learned	the	truth,	you	will	know	that	all	living
beings	are	but	part	of	Me–and	that	they	are	in	Me,	and	are	Mine.
PURPORT
The	result	of	receiving	knowledge	from	a	self-realized	soul,	or	one	who
knows	things	as	they	are,	is	learning	that	all	living	beings	are	parts	and	parcels
of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.	The	sense	of	a
separated	existence	from	Kṛṣṇa	is	called	
māyā	(mā
–not,	
yā
–this).	Some	think
that	we	have	nothing	to	do	with	Kṛṣṇa,	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	only	a	great	historical
personality	and	that	the	Absolute	is	the	impersonal	Brahman.	Factually,	as	it	is
stated	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
this	impersonal	Brahman	is	the	personal
effulgence	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Kṛṣṇa,	as	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	is	the
cause	of	everything.	In	the	
Brahma-saṁhitā	
it	is	clearly	stated	that	Kṛṣṇa	is
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	the	cause	of	all	causes.	Even	the
millions	of	incarnations	are	only	His	different	expansions.	Similarly,	the	living
entities	are	also	expansions	of	Kṛṣṇa.	The	Māyāvādī	philosophers	wrongly
think	that	Kṛṣṇa	loses	His	own	separate	existence	in	His	many	expansions.
This	thought	is	material	in	nature.	We	have	experience	in	the	material	world
that	a	thing,	when	fragmentally	distributed,	loses	its	own	original	identity.	But
the	Māyāvādī	philosophers	fail	to	understand	that	Absolute	means	that	one
plus	one	is	equal	to	one,	and	that	one	minus	one	is	also	equal	to	one.	This	is
the	case	in	the	absolute	world.
For	want	of	sufficient	knowledge	in	the	absolute	science,	we	are	now
covered	with	illusion,	and	therefore	we	think	that	we	are	separate	from	Kṛṣṇa.Although	we	are	separated	parts	of	Kṛṣṇa,	we	are	nevertheless	not	different
from	Him.	The	bodily	difference	of	the	living	entities	is	
māyā
,	or	not	actual
fact.	We	are	all	meant	to	satisfy	Kṛṣṇa.	By	
māyā
	alone	Arjuna	thought	that	the
temporary	bodily	relationship	with	his	kinsmen	was	more	important	than	his
eternal	spiritual	relationship	with	Kṛṣṇa.	The	whole	teaching	of	the	
Gītā
	is
targetted	toward	this	end:	that	a	living	being,	as	His	eternal	servitor,	cannot	be
separated	from	Kṛṣṇa,	and	his	sense	of	being	an	identity	apart	from	Kṛṣṇa	is
called	
māyā
.	The	living	entities,	as	separate	parts	and	parcels	of	the	Supreme,
have	a	purpose	to	fulfill.	Having	forgotten	that	purpose,	since	time
immemorial	they	are	situated	in	different	bodies,	as	men,	animals,	demigods,
etc.	Such	bodily	differences	arise	from	forgetfulness	of	the	transcendental
service	of	the	Lord.	But	when	one	is	engaged	in	transcendental	service
through	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	one	becomes	at	once	liberated	from	this
illusion.	One	can	acquire	such	pure	knowledge	only	from	the	bona	fide
spiritual	master	and	thereby	avoid	the	delusion	that	the	living	entity	is	equal	to
Kṛṣṇa.	Perfect	knowledge	is	that	the	Supreme	Soul,	Kṛṣṇa,	is	the	supreme
shelter	for	all	living	entities,	and	giving	up	such	shelter,	the	living	entities	are
deluded	by	the	material	energy,	imagining	themselves	to	have	a	separate
identity.	Thus,	under	different	standards	of	material	identity,	they	become
forgetful	of	Kṛṣṇa.	When,	however,	such	deluded	living	entities	become
situated	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	it	is	to	be	understood	that	they	are	on	the	path
of	liberation,	as	confirmed	in	the	
Bhāgavatam:	muktir	hitvānyathā	rūpaṁ
svarūpeṇa	vyavasthitiḥ.	
Liberation	means	to	be	situated	in	one's	constitutional
position	as	the	eternal	servitor	of	Kṛṣṇa	(Kṛṣṇa	consciousness).
TEXT	36
अ ि प
	
च े द ि स
	
प ा प े ᇷ य ः
	
स व ᆹ ᇷ य ः
	
प ा प क ृ ሧ म ः
	
।
स व ᆾ
	
ᇥ ा न ᇴ ल व े न ै व
	
व ृ ि ज न ं
	
स ᇳ त ि र ᇾ य ि स
	
॥
३ ६
॥
api	ced	asi	pāpebhyaḥ
sarvebhyaḥ	pāpa-kṛttamaḥ
sarvaṁ	jñāna-plavenaiva
vṛjinaṁ	santariṣyasi
api—
even;	
cet—
if;	
asi—
you	are;	
pāpebhyaḥ—
of	sinners;	
sarvebhyaḥ—
of
all;	
pāpa-kṛttamaḥ—
the	greatest	sinner;	
sarvam—
all	such	sinful	actions;jñāna-plavena—
by	the	boat	of	transcendental	knowledge;	
eva—
certainly;
vṛjinam—
the	ocean	of	miseries;	
santariṣyasi—
you	will	cross	completely.
TRANSLATION
Even	if	you	are	considered	to	be	the	most	sinful	of	all	sinners,	when	you
are	situated	in	the	boat	of	transcendental	knowledge,	you	will	be	able	to
cross	over	the	ocean	of	miseries.
PURPORT
Proper	understanding	of	one's	constitutional	position	in	relationship	to
Kṛṣṇa	is	so	nice	that	it	can	at	once	lift	one	from	the	struggle	for	existence
which	goes	on	in	the	ocean	of	nescience.	This	material	world	is	sometimes
regarded	as	an	ocean	of	nescience	and	sometimes	as	a	blazing	forest.	In	the
ocean,	however	expert	a	swimmer	one	may	be,	the	struggle	for	existence	is
very	severe.	If	someone	comes	forward	and	lifts	the	struggling	swimmer	from
the	ocean,	he	is	the	greatest	savior.	Perfect	knowledge,	received	from	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	is	the	path	of	liberation.	The	boat	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	very	simple,	but	at	the	same	time	the	most	sublime.
TEXT	37
य थ ै ध ा ं ि स
	
स ि म ሬ ो ऽ ि ᇩ न भ ᆼ ᇿ म स ा ᇰ क ु ኄ त े ऽ ज ु ᆼ न
	
।
ᇥ ा न ा ि ᇩ न ः
	
स व ᆼ क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
भ ᇿ म स ा ᇰ क ु ኄ त े
	
त थ ा
	
॥
३ ७
॥
yathaidhāṁsi	samiddho	'gnir
bhasmasāt	kurute	'rjuna
jñānāgniḥ	sarva-karmāṇi
bhasmasāt	kurute	tathā
yathā—
just	as;	
edhāṁsi—
firewood;	
samiddhaḥ—
blazing;	
agniḥ—
fire;
bhasmasāt—
turns	into	ashes;	
kurute—
so	does;	
arjuna—
O	Arjuna;	
jñāna-
agniḥ—
the	fire	of	knowledge;	
sarva-karmāṇi—
all	reactions	to	material
activities;	
bhasmasāt—
to	ashes;	
kurute—
it	so	does;	
tathā—
similarly.TRANSLATION
As	the	blazing	fire	turns	firewood	to	ashes,	O	Arjuna,	so	does	the	fire	of
knowledge	burn	to	ashes	all	reactions	to	material	activities.
PURPORT
Perfect	knowledge	of	self	and	Superself	and	of	their	relationship	is
compared	herein	to	fire.	This	fire	not	only	burns	up	all	reactions	to	impious
activities,	but	also	all	reactions	to	pious	activities,	turning	them	to	ashes.
There	are	many	stages	of	reaction:	reaction	in	the	making,	reaction	fructifying,
reaction	already	achieved,	and	reaction	
a	priori.	
But	knowledge	of	the
constitutional	position	of	the	living	entity	burns	everything	to	ashes.	When
one	is	in	complete	knowledge,	all	reactious,	both	
a	priori	
and	
a	posteriori,	
are
consumed.	In	the	
Vedas	
it	is	stated:	
ubhe	uhaivaiṣa	ete	taraty	amṛtaḥ	sādhv-
asādhūnī:
	"One	overcomes	both	the	pious	and	impious	interactions	of	work."
TEXT	38
न
	
ि ह
	
ᇥ ा न े न
	
स द ृ श ं
	
प ि व त ् र ि म ह
	
ि व ሱ त े
	
।
त ᇰ ᇿ व य ं
	
य ो ग स ं ि स ሬ ः
	
क ा ल े न ा ᇰ म ि न
	
ि व ᇳ द ि त
	
॥
३ ८
॥
na	hi	jñānena	sadṛśaṁ
pavitram	iha	vidyate
tat	svayaṁ	yoga-saṁsiddhaḥ
kālenātmani	vindati
na—
never;	
hi—
certainly;	
jñānena—
with	knowledge;	
sadṛśam—
in
comparison;	
pavitram—
sanctified;	
iha—
in	this	world;	
vidyate—
exists;	
tat
—
that;	
svayam—
itself;	
yoga—
devotion;	
saṁsiddhaḥ—
matured;	
kālena—
in
course	of	time;	
ātmani—
in	himself;	
vindati—
enjoys.
TRANSLATION
In	this	world,	there	is	nothing	so	sublime	and	pure	as	transcendentalknowledge.	Such	knowledge	is	the	mature	fruit	of	all	mysticism.	And	one
who	has	achieved	this	enjoys	the	self	within	himself	in	due	course	of	time.
PURPORT
When	we	speak	of	transcendental	knowledge,	we	do	so	in	terms	of	spiritual
understanding.	As	such,	there	is	nothing	so	sublime	and	pure	as	transcendental
knowledge.	Ignorance	is	the	cause	of	our	bondage,	and	knowledge	is	the	cause
of	our	liberation.	This	knowledge	is	the	mature	fruit	of	devotional	service,	and
when	one	is	situated	in	transcendental	knowledge,	he	need	not	search	for
peace	elsewhere,	for	he	enjoys	peace	within	himself.	In	other	words,	this
knowledge	and	peace	are	culminated	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	That	is	the	last
word	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā.
TEXT	39
श ् र ሬ ा व ा ँ ᇺ ल भ त े
	
ᇥ ा न ं
	
त ᇰ प र ः
	
स ं य त े ि ᇳ द ् र य ः
	
।
ᇥ ा न ं
	
ल ᇶ ᇲ व ा
	
प र ा ं
	
श ा ि ᇳ त म ि च र े ण ा ि ध ग ᇫ छ ि त
	
॥
३ ९
॥
śraddhāvāl	labhate	jñānaṁ
tat-paraḥ	saṁyatendriyaḥ
jñānaṁ	labdhvā	parāṁ	śāntim
acireṇādhigacchati
śraddhāvān—
a	faithful	man;	
labhate—
achieves;	
jñānam—
knowledge;	
tat-
paraḥ—
very	much	attached	to	it;	
saṁyata—
controlled;	
indriyaḥ—
senses;
jñānam—
knowledge;	
labdhvā—
having	achieved;	
parām—
transcendental;
śāntim—
peace;	
acireṇa—
very	soon;	
adhigacchati—
attains.
TRANSLATION
A	faithful	man	who	is	absorbed	in	transcendental	knowledge	and	who
subdues	his	senses	quickly	attains	the	supreme	spiritual	peace.
PURPORTSuch	knowledge	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	can	be	achieved	by	a	faithful
person	who	believes	firmly	in	Kṛṣṇa.	One	is	called	a	faithful	man	who	thinks
that,	simply	by	acting	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	he	can	attain	the	highest
perfection.	This	faith	is	attained	by	the	discharge	of	devotional	service,	and	by
chanting	
"Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/	Hare	Rāma,
Hare	Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,	Hare	Hare,"	
which	cleanses	one's	heart	of	all
material	dirt.	Over	and	above	this,	one	should	control	the	senses.	A	person
who	is	faithful	to	Kṛṣṇa	and	who	controls	the	senses	can	easily	attain
perfection	in	the	knowledge	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	without	delay.
TEXT	40
अ ᇥ ᇽ च ा श ् र ራ ध ा न ᇽ च
	
स ं श य ा ᇰ म ा
	
ि व न ᇽ य ि त
	
।
न ा य ं
	
ल ो क ो ऽ ि ᇿ त
	
न
	
प र ो
	
न
	
स ु ख ं
	
स ं श य ा ᇰ म न ः
	
॥
४ ०
॥
ajñaś	cāśraddadhānaś	ca
saṁśayātmā	vinaśyati
nāyaṁ	loko	'sti	na	paro
na	sukhaṁ	saṁśayātmanaḥ
ajñaḥ—
fools	who	have	no	knowledge	in	standard	scriptures;	
ca—
and;
aśraddadhānaḥ—
without	faith	in	revealed	scriptures;	
ca—
also;	
saṁśaya—
doubts;	
ātmā—
person;	
vinaśyati—
falls	back;	
na—
never;	
ayam—
this;	
lokaḥ—
world;	
asti—
there	is;	
na—
neither;	
paraḥ—
next	life;	
na—
not;	
sukham—
happiness;	
saṁśaya—
doubtful;	
ātmanaḥ—
of	the	person.
TRANSLATION
But	ignorant	and	faithless	persons	who	doubt	the	revealed	scriptures
do	not	attain	God	consciousness.	For	the	doubting	soul	there	is	happiness
neither	in	this	world	nor	in	the	next.
PURPORT
Out	of	many	standard	and	authoritative	revealed	scriptures,	the	
Bhagavad-
gītā	
is	the	best.	Persons	who	are	almost	like	animals	have	no	faith	in,	orknowledge	of,	the	standard	revealed	scriptures;	and	some,	even	though	they
have	knowledge	of,	or	can	cite	passages	from,	the	revealed	scriptures,	have
actually	no	faith	in	these	words.	And	even	though	others	may	have	faith	in
scriptures	like	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
they	do	not	believe	in	or	worship	the
Personality	of	Godhead,	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.	Such	persons	cannot	have	any	standing	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	They	fall	down.	Out	of	all	the	abovementioned	persons,
those	who	have	no	faith	and	are	always	doubtful	make	no	progress	at	all.	Men
without	faith	in	God	and	His	revealed	word	find	no	good	in	this	world,	nor	in
the	next.	For	them	there	is	no	happiness	whatsoever.	One	should	therefore
follow	the	principles	of	revealed	scriptures	with	faith	and	thereby	be	raised	to
the	platform	of	knowledge.	Only	this	knowledge	will	help	one	become
promoted	to	the	transcendental	platform	of	spiritual	understanding.	In	other
words,	doubtful	persons	have	no	status	whatsoever	in	spiritual	emancipation.
One	should	therefore	follow	in	the	footsteps	of	great	
ācāryas	
who	are	in	the
disciplic	succession	and	thereby	attain	success.
TEXT	41
य ो ग स ं ᇳ य ᇿ त क म ा ᆼ ण ं
	
ᇥ ा न स ि ᇮ छ ᇳ न स ं श य म ्
	
।
आ ᇰ म व ᇳ त ं
	
न
	
क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
ि न ब ᇲ न ि ᇳ त
	
ध न ᇮ ज य
	
॥
४ १
॥
yoga-sannyasta-karmāṇaṁ
jñāna-sañchinna-saṁśayam
ātma-vantaṁ	na	karmāṇi
nibadhnanti	dhanañjaya
yoga—
devotional	service	in	
karma-yoga;	sannyasta—
renounced;
karmāṇam—
of	the	performers;	
jñāna—
knowledge;	
sañchinna—
cut	by	the
advancement	of	knowledge;	
saṁśayam—
doubts;	
ātma-vantam—
situated	in
the	self;	
na—
never;	
karmāṇi—
work;	
nibadhnanti—
do	bind	up;
	dhanañjaya
—
O	conquerer	of	riches.
TRANSLATION
Therefore,	one	who	has	renounced	the	fruits	of	his	action,	whose	doubts
are	destroyed	by	transcendental	knowledge,	and	who	is	situated	firmly	in
the	self,	is	not	bound	by	works,	O	conqueror	of	riches.PURPORT
One	who	follows	the	instruction	of	the	
Gītā
,	as	it	is	imparted	by	the	Lord,
the	Personality	of	Godhead	Himself,	becomes	free	from	all	doubts	by	the
grace	of	transcendental	knowledge.	He,	as	a	part	and	parcel	of	the	Lord,	in	full
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	is	already	established	in	self-knowledge.	As	such,	he	is
undoubtedly	above	bondage	to	action.
TEXT	42
त ᇿ म ा द ᇥ ा न स ᇸ भ ू त ं
	
ᇦ ᇰ ᇿ थ ं
	
ᇥ ा न ा ि स न ा ᇰ म न ः
	
।
ि छ ᇰ ᇰ व ै न ं
	
स ं श य ं
	
य ो ग म ा ि त ᇾ ठ ो ि ሧ ᇾ ठ
	
भ ा र त
	
॥
४ २
॥
tasmād	ajñāna-sambhūtaṁ
hṛt-sthaṁ	jñānāsinātmanaḥ
chittvainaṁ	saṁśayaṁ	yogam
ātiṣṭhottiṣṭha	bhārata
tasmāt—
therefore;	
ajñāna-sambhūtam—
outcome	of	ignorance;	
hṛt-stham
—situated	in	the	heart;	
jñāna—
knowledge;	
asinā—
by	the	weapon	of;	
ātmanaḥ
—
of	the	self;	
chittvā—
cutting	off;	
enam—
this;	
saṁśayam—
doubt;	
yogam—
in
yoga;
	ātiṣṭha—
be	situated;	
uttiṣṭha—
stand	up	to	fight;	
bhārata—	
O
descendant	of	Bharata.
TRANSLATION
Therefore	the	doubts	which	have	arisen	in	your	heart	out	of	ignorance
should	be	slashed	by	the	weapon	of	knowledge.	Armed	with	yoga,	O
Bhārata,	stand	and	fight.
PURPORT
The	
yoga	
system	instructed	in	this	chapter	is	called	
sanātana-yoga,	
or
eternal	activities	performed	by	the	living	entity.	This	
yoga	
has	two	divisions	of
sacrificial	actions:	one	is	called	sacrifice	of	one's	material	possessions,	and	theother	is	called	knowledge	of	self,	which	is	pure	spiritual	activity.	If	sacrifice	of
one's	material	possessions	is	not	dovetailed	for	spiritual	realization,	then	such
sacrifice	becomes	material.	But	one	who	performs	such	sacrifices	with	a
spiritual	objective,	or	in	devotional	service,	makes	a	perfect	sacrifice.	When
we	come	to	spiritual	activities,	we	find	that	these	are	also	divided	into	two:
namely,	understanding	of	one's	own	self	(or	one's	constitutional	position),	and
the	truth	regarding	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	One	who	follows	the
path	of	the	
Gītā
	as	it	is	can	very	easily	understand	these	two	important
divisions	of	spiritual	knowledge.	For	him	there	is	no	difficulty	in	obtaining
perfect	knowledge	of	the	self	as	part	and	parcel	of	the	Lord.	And	such
understanding	is	beneficial	for	such	a	person	who	easily	understands	the
transcendental	activities	of	the	Lord.	In	the	beginning	of	this	chapter,	the
transcendental	activities	of	the	Lord	were	discussed	by	the	Supreme	Lord
Himself.	One	who	does	not	understand	the	instructions	of	the	
Gītā
	is	faithless,
and	is	to	be	considered	to	be	misusing	the	fragmental	independence	awarded
to	him	by	the	Lord.	In	spite	of	such	instructions,	one	who	does	not	understand
the	real	nature	of	the	Lord	as	the	eternal,	blissful,	all-knowing	Personality	of
Godhead,	is	certainly	fool	number	one.	Ignorance	can	be	removed	by	gradual
acceptance	of	the	principles	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is
awakened	by	different	types	of	sacrifices	to	the	demigods,	sacrifice	to
Brahman,	sacrifice	in	celibacy,	in	household	life,	in	controlling	the	senses,	in
practicing	mystic	
yoga,	
in	penance,	in	foregoing	material	possessions,	in
studying	the	
Vedas,	
and	in	partaking	of	the	social	institution	called
varṇāśrama-dharma.
	All	of	these	are	known	as	sacrifice,	and	all	of	them	are
based	on	regulated	action.	But	within	all	these	activities,	the	important	factor
is	self-realization.	One	who	seeks	
that	
objective	is	the	real	student	of
Bhagavad-gītā,	
but	one	who	doubts	the	authority	of	Kṛṣṇa	falls	back.	One	is
therefore	advised	to	study	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
or	any	other	scripture,	under	a	bona
fide	spiritual	master,	with	service	and	surrender.	A	bona	fide	spiritual	master	is
in	the	disciplic	succession	from	time	eternal,	and	he	does	not	deviate	at	all
from	the	instructions	of	the	Supreme	Lord	as	they	were	imparted	millions	of
years	ago	to	the	sun-god,	from	whom	the	instructions	of	
Bhagavad-gītā	
have
come	down	to	the	earthly	kingdom.	One	should,	therefore,	follow	the	path	of
Bhagavad-gītā	
as	it	is	expressed	in	the	
Gītā	
itself	and	beware	of	self-
interested	people	after	personal	aggrandizement	who	deviate	others	from	the
actual	path.	The	Lord	is	definitely	the	supreme	person,	and	His	activities	are
transcendental.	One	who	understands	this	is	a	liberated	person	from	the	very
beginning	of	his	study	of	the	
Gītā.Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	Fourth	Chapter	of	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhagavad-gītā	
in	the	matter	of	Transcendental	Knowledge.Chapter-5
CHAPTER	FIVE
Karma-yoga
—
Action	in	Kṛṣṇa	Consciousness
TEXT	1
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
स ं ᇳ य ा स ं
	
क म ᆼ ण ा ं
	
क ृ ᇾ ण
	
प ु न य ो ᆼ ग ं
	
च
	
श ं स ि स
	
।
य ᇫ छ ् र े य
	
ए त य ो र े क ं
	
त ᇳ म े
	
ब ् ኅ ि ह
	
स ु ि न ि ᇽ च त म ्
	
॥
१
॥
arjuna	uvāca
sannyāsaṁ	karmaṇāṁ	kṛṣṇapunar	yogaṁ	ca	śaṁsasi
yac	chreya	etayor	ekaṁ
tan	me	brūhi	suniścitam
arjunaḥ	uvāca—
Arjuna	said;	
sannyāsam—
renunciation;	
karmaṇām—
of	all
activities;	
kṛṣṇa
—O	Kṛṣṇa;	
punaḥ—
again;	
yogam—
devotional	service;	
ca
—
also;	
śaṁsasi—
You	are	praising;	
yat—
which;	
śreyaḥ—
is	beneficial;	
etayoḥ
—
of	these	two;	
ekam—
one;	
tat—
that;	
me—
unto	me;	
brūhi—
please	tell;
suniścitam—
definitely.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	said:	O	Kṛṣṇa,	first	of	all	You	ask	me	to	renounce	work,	and
then	again	You	recommend	work	with	devotion.	Now	will	You	kindly	tell
me	definitely	which	of	the	two	is	more	beneficial?
PURPORT
In	this	Fifth	Chapter	of	the	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
the	Lord	says	that	work	in
devotional	service	is	better	than	dry	mental	speculation.	Devotional	service	is
easier	than	the	latter	because,	being	transcendental	in	nature,	it	frees	one	from
reaction.	In	the	Second	Chapter,	preliminary	knowledge	of	the	soul	and	its
entanglement	in	the	material	body	were	explained.	How	to	get	out	of	this
material	encagement	by	
buddhi-yoga,	
or	devotional	service,	was	also
explained	therein.	In	the	Third	Chapter,	it	was	explained	that	a	person	who	is
situated	on	the	platform	of	knowledge	no	longer	has	any	duties	to	perform.
And,	in	the	Fourth	Chapter,	the	Lord	told	Arjuna	that	all	kinds	of	sacrificial
work	culminate	in	knowledge.	However,	at	the	end	of	the	Fourth	Chapter,	the
Lord	advised	Arjuna	to	wake	up	and	fight,	being	situated	in	perfect
knowledge.	Therefore,	by	simultaneously	stressing	the	importance	of	both
work	in	devotion	and	inaction	in	knowledge,	Kṛṣṇa	has	perplexed	Arjuna	and
confused	his	determination.	Arjuna	understands	that	renunciation	in
knowledge	involves	cessation	of	all	kinds	of	work	performed	as	sense
activities.	But	if	one	performs	work	in	devotional	service,	then	how	is	work
stopped?	In	other	words,	he	thinks	that	
sannyāsam
,	or	renunciation	in
knowledge,	should	be	altogether	free	from	all	kinds	of	activity	because	work
and	renunciation	appear	to	him	to	be	incompatible.	He	appears	not	to	haveunderstood	that	work	in	full	knowledge	is	nonreactive	and	is	therefore	the
same	as	inaction.	He	inquires,	therefore,	whether	he	should	cease	work
altogether,	or	work	with	full	knowledge.
TEXT	2
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
स ं ᇳ य ा स ः
	
क म ᆼ य ो ग ᇽ च
	
ि न ः श ् र े य स क र ा व ृ भ ौ
	
।
त य ो ᇿ त ु
	
क म ᆼ स ं ᇳ य ा स ा ᇰ क म ᆼ य ो ग ो
	
ि व ि श ᇾ य त े
	
॥
२
॥
śrī-bhagavān	uvāca
sannyāsaḥ	karma-yogaś	ca
niḥśreyasa-karāv	ubhau
tayos	tu	karma-sannyāsāt
karma-yogo	viśiṣyate
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
sannyāsaḥ—
renunciation	of	work;	
karma-yogaḥ—
work	in	devotion;	
ca—
also;	
niḥśreyasa-
karau—
all	leading	to	the	path	of	liberation;	
ubhau—
both;	
tayoḥ—
of	the	two;
tu—
but;	
karma-sannyāsāt—
in	comparison	to	the	renunciation	of	fruitive
work;	
karma-yogaḥ—
work	in	devotion;	
viśiṣyate—
is	better.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	The	renunciation	of	work	and	work	in	devotion
are	both	good	for	liberation.	But,	of	the	two,	work	in	devotional	service	is
better	than	renunciation	of	works.
PURPORT
Fruitive	activities	(seeking	sense	gratification)	are	cause	for	material
bondage.	As	long	as	one	is	engaged	in	activities	aimed	at	improving	the
standard	of	bodily	comfort,	one	is	sure	to	transmigrate	to	different	types	of
bodies,	thereby	continuing	material	bondage	perpetually.	
Śrīmad-	Bhāgavatam
confirms	this	as	follows:nūnaṁ	pramattaḥ	kurute	vikarma	yad-indriya-prītaya	āpṛṇoti
na	sādhu	manye	yata	ātmano	'yam	asann	api	kleśada	āsa	dehaḥ
parābhavas	tāvad	abodha-jāto	yāvanna	jijñāsata	ātma-tattvam
yāvat	kriyās	tāvad	idaṁ	mano	vai	karmātmakaṁ	yena	śarīra-bandhaḥ
evaṁ	manaḥ	karma	vaśaṁ	prayuṅkte	avidyayātmany	upadhīyamāne
prītir	na	yāvan	mayi	vāsudeve	na	mucyate	deha-yogena	tāvat
"People	are	mad	after	sense	gratification,	and	they	do	not	know	that	this
present	body,	which	is	full	of	miseries,	is	a	result	of	one's	fruitive	activities	in
the	past.	Although	this	body	is	temporary,	it	is	always	giving	one	trouble	in
many	ways.	Therefore,	to	act	for	sense	gratification	is	not	good.	One	is
considered	to	be	a	failure	in	life	as	long	as	he	makes	no	inquiry	about	the
nature	of	work	for	fruitive	results,	for	as	long	as	one	is	engrossed	in	the
consciousness	of	sense	gratification,	one	has	to	transmigrate	from	one	body	to
another.	Although	the	mind	may	be	engrossed	in	fruitive	activities	and
influenced	by	ignorance,	one	must	develop	a	love	for	devotional	service	to
Vāsudeva.	Only	then	can	one	have	the	opportunity	to	get	out	of	the	bondage
of	material	existence."	
(Bhāg.
	5.5.4-6)
Therefore,	
jñāna	
(or	knowledge	that	one	is	not	this	material	body	but	spirit
soul)	is	not	sufficient	for	liberation.	One	has	to	
act	
in	the	status	of	spirit	soul,
otherwise	there	is	no	escape	from	material	bondage.	Action	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	not,	however,	action	on	the	fruitive	platform.	Activities
performed	in	full	knowledge	strengthen	one's	advancement	in	real	knowledge.
Without	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	mere	renunciation	of	fruitive	activities	does	not
actually	purify	the	heart	of	a	conditioned	soul.	As	long	as	the	heart	is	not
purified,	one	has	to	work	on	the	fruitive	platform.	But	action	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	automatically	helps	one	escape	the	result	of	fruitive	action	so
that	one	need	not	descend	to	the	material	platform.	Therefore,	action	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	always	superior	to	renunciation,	which	always	entails	a	risk
of	falling.	Renunciation	without	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	incomplete,	as	is
confirmed	by	Śrīla	Rūpa	Gosvāmī	in	his	
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu.
prāpañcikatayā	buddhyā	hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ
mumukṣubhiḥ	parityāgo	vairāgyaṁ	phalgu	kathyate.
"Renunciation	by	persons	eager	to	achieve	liberation	of	things	which	arerelated	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	though	they	are	material,	is
called	incomplete	renunciation."	Renunciation	is	compete	when	it	is	in	the
knowledge	that	everything	in	existence	belongs	to	the	Lord	and	that	no	one
should	claim	proprietorship	over	anything.	One	should	understand	that,
factually,	nothing	belongs	to	anyone.	Then	where	is	the	question	of
renunciation?	One	who	knows	that	everything	is	Kṛṣṇa's	property	is	always
situated	in	renunciation.	Since	everything	belongs	to	Kṛṣṇa,	everything	should
be	employed	in	the	service	of	Kṛṣṇa.	This	perfect	form	of	action	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	far	better	than	any	amount	of	artificial	renunciation	by	a
sannyāsī
	of	the	Māyāvādī	school.
TEXT	3
ᇥ े य ः
	
स
	
ि न ᇰ य स ं ᇳ य ा स ी
	
य ो
	
न
	
ሲ े ि ᇾ ट
	
न
	
क ा ङ ् ᇤ ि त
	
।
ि न द ् ᆼ व ᇳ ሲ ो
	
ि ह
	
म ह ा ब ा ह ो
	
स ु ख ं
	
ब ᇳ ध ा ᇰ प ् र म ु ᇫ य त े
	
॥
३
॥
jñeyaḥ	sa	nitya-sannyāsī
yo	na	dveṣṭi	na	kāṅkṣati
nirdvandvo	hi	mahā-bāho
sukhaṁ	bandhāt	pramucyate
jñeyaḥ—
should	be	known;	
saḥ—
he;	
nitya—
always;	
sannyāsī—
renouncer;
yaḥ—
who;	
na—
never;	
dveṣṭi—
abhors;	
na—
nor;	
kāṅkṣati—
desires;
nirdvandvaḥ—
free	from	all	dualities;	
hi—
certainly;	
mahā-bāho—
O	mighty-
armed	one;	
sukham—
happily;	
bandhāt—
from	bondage;	
pramucyate
—
completely	liberated.
TRANSLATION
One	who	neither	hates	nor	desires	the	fruits	of	his	activities	is	known	to
be	always	renounced.	Such	a	person,	liberated	from	all	dualities,	easily
overcomes	material	bondage	and	is	completely	liberated,	O	mighty-
armed	Arjuna.
PURPORTOne	who	is	fully	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	always	a	renouncer	because	he
feels	neither	hatred	nor	desire	for	the	results	of	his	actions.	Such	a	renouncer,
dedicated	to	the	transcendental	loving	service	of	the	Lord,	is	fully	qualified	in
knowledge	because	he	knows	his	constitutional	position	in	his	relationship
with	Kṛṣṇa.	He	knows	fully	well	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	whole	and	that	he	is	part
and	parcel	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Such	knowledge	is	perfect	because	it	is	qualitatively	and
quantitatively	correct.	The	concept	of	oneness	with	Kṛṣṇa	is	incorrect	because
the	part	cannot	be	equal	to	the	whole.	Knowledge	that	one	is	one	in	quality	yet
different	in	quantity	is	correct	transcendental	knowledge	leading	one	to
become	full	in	himself,	having	nothing	to	aspire	to	nor	lament	over.	There	is
no	duality	in	his	mind	because	whatever	he	does,	he	does	for	Kṛṣṇa.	Being
thus	freed	from	the	platform	of	dualities,	he	is	liberated–even	in	this	material
world.
TEXT	4
स ा ङ ् ᇨ य य ो ग ौ
	
प ृ थ ᇩ ब ा ल ा ः
	
प ् र व द ि ᇳ त
	
न
	
प ि ᇯ ड त ा ः
	
।
ए क म ᇴ य ा ि ᇿ थ त ः
	
स ᇸ य ग ु भ य ो ि व ᆼ ᇳ द त े
	
फ ल म ्
	
॥
४
॥
sāṅkhya-yogau	pṛthag	bālāḥ
pravadanti	na	paṇḍitāḥ
ekam	apy	āsthitaḥ	samyag
ubhayor	vindate	phalam
sāṅkhya—
analytical	study	of	the	material	world;	
yogau—
work	in
devotional	service;	
pṛthak—
different;	
bālāḥ—
less	intelligent;	
pravadanti—
do
talk;	
na—
never;	
paṇḍitāḥ—
the	learned;	
ekam—
in	one;	
api—
even	though;
āsthitaḥ—
being	situated;	
samyak—
complete;	
ubhayoḥ—
of	both;	
vindate—
enjoys;	
phalam—
result.
TRANSLATION
Only	the	ignorant	speak	of	karma-yoga	and	devotional	service	as	being
different	from	the	analytical	study	of	the	material	world	[sāṅkhya].	Those
who	are	actually	learned	say	that	he	who	applies	himself	well	to	one	of
these	paths	achieves	the	results	of	both.PURPORT
The	aim	of	the	analytical	study	of	the	material	world	is	to	find	the	soul	of
existence.	The	soul	of	the	material	world	is	Viṣṇu,	or	the	Supersoul.
Devotional	service	to	the	Lord	entails	service	to	the	Supersoul.	One	process	is
to	find	the	root	of	the	tree,	and	next	to	water	the	root.	The	real	student	of
sāṅkhya	
philosophy	finds	the	root	of	the	material	world,	Viṣṇu,	and	then,	in
perfect	knowledge,	engages	himself	in	the	service	of	the	Lord.	Therefore,	in
essence,	there	is	no	difference	between	the	two	because	the	aim	of	both	is
Viṣṇu.	Those	who	do	not	know	the	ultimate	end	say	that	the	purposes	of
sāṅkhya	
and	
karma-yoga	
are	not	the	same,	but	one	who	is	learned	knows	the
unifying	aim	in	these	different	processes.
TEXT	5
य ᇰ स ा ङ ् ᇨ य ै ः
	
प ् र ा ᇴ य त े
	
ᇿ थ ा न ं
	
त ሱ ो ग ै र ि प
	
ग ᇸ य त े
	
।
ए क ं
	
स ा ङ ् ᇨ य ं
	
च
	
य ो ग ं
	
च
	
य ः
	
प ᇽ य ि त
	
स
	
प ᇽ य ि त
	
॥
५
॥
yat	sāṅkhyaiḥ	prāpyate	sthānaṁ
tad	yogair	api	gamyate
ekaṁ	sāṅkhyaṁ	ca	yogaṁ	ca
yaḥ	paśyati	sa	paśyati
yat—
what;	
sāṅkhyaiḥ—
by	means	of	
sāṅkhya	
philosophy;	
prāpyate—
is
achieved;	
sthānam—
place;	
tat—
that;	
yogaiḥ—
by	devotional	service;	
api—
also;	
gamyate—
one	can	attain;	
ekam—
one;	
sāṅkhyam—
analytical	study;	
ca
—
and;	
yogam—
action	in	devotion;	
ca—
and;	
yaḥ—
one	who;	
paśyati—
sees;
saḥ—
he;	
paśyati—
actually	sees.
TRANSLATION
One	who	knows	that	the	position	reached	by	means	of	renunciation	can
also	be	attained	by	works	in	devotional	service	and	who	therefore	sees
that	the	path	of	works	and	the	path	of	renunciation	are	one,	sees	things	as
they	are.PURPORT
The	real	purpose	of	philosophical	research	is	to	find	the	ultimate	goal	of
life.	Since	the	ultimate	goal	of	life	is	self-realization,	there	is	no	difference
between	the	conclusions	reached	by	the	two	processes.	By	
sāṅkhya
philosophical	research	one	comes	to	the	conclusion	that	a	living	entity	is	not	a
part	and	parcel	of	the	material	world,	but	of	the	supreme	spirit	whole.
Consequently,	the	spirit	soul	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	material	world;	his
actions	must	be	in	some	relation	with	the	Supreme.	When	he	acts	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	he	is	actually	in	his	constitutional	position.	In	the	first	process
of	
sāṅkhya,	
one	has	to	become	detached	from	matter,	and	in	the	devotional
yoga	
process	one	has	to	attach	himself	to	the	work	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Factually,	both
processes	are	the	same,	although	superficially	one	process	appears	to	involve
detachment	and	the	other	process	appears	to	involve	attachment.	However,
detachment	from	matter	and	attachment	to	Kṛṣṇa	are	one	and	the	same.	One
who	can	see	this	sees	things	as	they	are.
TEXT	6
स ं ᇳ य ा स ᇿ त ु
	
म ह ा ब ा ह ो
	
द ु ः ख म ा ᇴ त ु म य ो ग त ः
	
।
य ो ग य ु ᇧ त ो
	
म ु ि न ब ् र ᆼ ቊ
	
न ि च र े ण ा ि ध ग ᇫ छ ि त
	
॥
६
॥
sannyāsas	tu	mahā-bāho
duḥkham	āptum	ayogataḥ
yoga-yukto	munir	brahma
na	cireṇādhigacchati
sannyāsaḥ—
the	renounced	order	of	life;	
tu—
but;	
mahā-bāho—
O	mighty-
armed	one;	
duḥkham—
distress;	
āptum—
to	be	afflicted	with;	
ayogataḥ—
without	devotional	service;	
yoga-yuktaḥ—
one	engaged	in	devotional	service;
muniḥ—
thinker;	
brahma—
Supreme;	
na—
without;	
cireṇa—
delay;
adhigacchati—
attains.
TRANSLATION
Unless	one	is	engaged	in	the	devotional	service	of	the	Lord,	mererenunciation	of	activities	cannot	make	one	happy.	The	sages,	purified	by
works	of	devotion,	achieve	the	Supreme	without	delay.
PURPORT
There	are	two	classes	of	
sannyāsīs,	
or	persons	in	the	renounced	order	of
life.	The	Māyāvādī	
sannyāsīs
	are	engaged	in	the	study	of	
sāṅkhya	
philosophy,
whereas	the	Vaisnava	
sannyāsīs	
are	engaged	in	the	study	of	
Bhāgavatam
philosophy,	which	affords	the	proper	commentary	on	the	
Vedānta-sūtras.	
The
Māyāvādī	
sannyāsīs
	also	study	the	
Vedānta-sūtras,	
but	use	their	own
commentary,	called	
Śārīraka-bhāṣya,	
written	by	Śaṅkarācārya.	The	students
of	the	
Bhāgavata	
school	are	engaged	in	devotional	service	of	the	Lord,
according	to	
pāñcarātrikī	
regulations,	and	therefore	the	Vaiṣṇava	
sannyāsīs
have	multiple	engagements	in	the	transcendental	service	of	the	Lord.	The
Vaiṣṇava	
sannyāsīs
	have	nothing	to	do	with	material	activities,	and	yet	they
perform	various	activities	in	their	devotional	service	to	the	Lord.	But	the
Māyāvādī	
sannyāsīs
,	engaged	in	the	studies	of	
sāṅkhya	
and	
Vedānta	
and
speculation,	cannot	relish	transcendental	service	of	the	Lord.	Because	their
studies	become	very	tedious,	they	sometimes	become	tired	of	Brahman
speculation,	and	thus	they	take	shelter	of	the	
Bhāgavatam	
without	proper
understanding.	Consequently	their	study	of	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
becomes
troublesome.	Dry	speculations	and	impersonal	interpretations	by	artificial
means	are	all	useless	for	the	Māyāvādī	
sannyāsīs
.	The	Vaiṣṇava	
sannyāsīs,
who	are	engaged	in	devotional	service,	are	happy	in	the	discharge	of	their
transcendental	duties,	and	they	have	the	guarantee	of	ultimate	entrance	into
the	kingdom	of	God.	The	Māyāvādī	
sannyāsīs	
sometimes	fall	down	from	the
path	of	self-realization	and	again	enter	into	material	activities	of	a
philanthropic	and	altruistic	nature,	which	are	nothing	but	material
engagements.	Therefore,	the	conclusion	is	that	those	who	are	engaged	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	are	better	situated	than	the	
sannyāsīs	
engaged	in	simple
Brahman	speculation,	although	they	too	come	to	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	after
many	births.
TEXT	7
य ो ग य ु ᇧ त ो
	
ि व श ु ሬ ा ᇰ म ा
	
ि व ि ज त ा ᇰ म ा
	
ि ज त े ि ᇳ द ् र य ः
	
।
स व ᆼ भ ू त ा ᇰ म भ ू त ा ᇰ म ा
	
क ु व ᆼ ᇳ न ि प
	
न
	
ि ल ᇴ य त े
	
॥
७
॥yoga-yukto	viśuddhātmā
vijitātmā	jitendriyaḥ
sarvabhūtātmabhūtātmā
kurvann	api	na	lipyate
yoga-yuktaḥ—
engaged	in	devotional	service;	
viśuddha-ātmā—
a	purified
soul;	
vijita-ātmā—
self-controlled;	
jita-indriyaḥ—
having	conquered	the	senses;
sarvabhuta-ātmabhūta-ātmā—
compassionate	to	all	living	entities;	
kurvan	api
—
although	engaged	in	work;	
na—
never;	
lipyate—
is	entangled.
TRANSLATION
One	who	works	in	devotion,	who	is	a	pure	soul,	and	who	controls	his
mind	and	senses,	is	dear	to	everyone,	and	everyone	is	dear	to	him.
Though	always	working,	such	a	man	is	never	entangled.
PURPORT
One	who	is	on	the	path	of	liberation	by	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	very	dear	to
every	living	being,	and	every	living	being	is	dear	to	him.	This	is	due	to	his
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Such	a	person	cannot	think	of	any	living	being	as
separate	from	Kṛṣṇa,	just	as	the	leaves	and	branches	of	a	tree	are	not	separate
from	the	tree.	He	knows	very	well	that	by	pouring	water	on	the	root	of	the
tree,	the	water	will	be	distributed	to	all	the	leaves	and	branches,	or	by
supplying	food	to	the	stomach,	the	energy	is	automatically	distributed
throughout	the	body.	Because	one	who	works	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is
servant	to	all,	he	is	very	dear	to	everyone.	And,	because	everyone	is	satisfied
by	his	work,	he	is	pure	in	consciousness.	Because	he	is	pure	in	consciousness,
his	mind	is	completely	controlled.	And,	because	his	mind	is	controlled,	his
senses	are	also	controlled.	Because	his	mind	is	always	fixed	on	Kṛṣṇa,	there	is
no	chance	of	his	being	deviated	from	Kṛṣṇa.	Nor	is	there	a	chance	that	he	will
engage	his	senses	in	matters	other	than	the	service	of	the	Lord.	He	does	not
like	to	hear	anything	except	topics	relating	to	Kṛṣṇa;	he	does	not	like	to	eat
anything	which	is	not	offered	to	Kṛṣṇa;	and	he	does	not	wish	to	go	anywhere
if	Kṛṣṇa	is	not	involved.	Therefore,	his	senses	are	controlled.	A	man	of
controlled	senses	cannot	be	offensive	to	anyone.	One	may	ask,	"Why	then	was
Arjuna	offensive	(in	battle)	to	others?	Wasn't	he	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness?"Arjuna	was	only	superficially	offensive	because	(as	has	already	been
explained	in	the	Second	Chapter)	all	the	assembled	persons	on	the	battlefield
would	continue	to	live	individually,	as	the	soul	cannot	be	slain.	So,	spiritually,
no	one	was	killed	on	the	Battlefield	of	Kurukṣetra.	Only	their	dresses	were
changed	by	the	order	of	Kṛṣṇa,	who	was	personally	present.	Therefore	Arjuna,
while	fighting	on	the	Battlefield	of	Kurukṣetra,	was	not	really	fighting	at	all;
he	was	simply	carrying	out	the	orders	of	Kṛṣṇa	in	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
Such	a	person	is	never	entangled	in	the	reactions	of	work.
TEXTS	8-9
न ै व
	
ि क ि ᇮ च ᇰ क र ो म ी ि त
	
य ु ᇧ त ो
	
म ᇳ य े त
	
त ᇰ ᇰ व ि व त ्
	
।
प ᇽ य ᇮ श ृ ᇯ व ᇳ ᇿ प ृ श ि ᇮ ज घ ् र ᇳ न ᇽ न ᇳ ग ᇫ छ ᇳ ᇿ व प ᇮ ᇽ व स न ्
	
॥
८
॥
प ् र ल प ि ᇳ व स ृ ज ᇳ ग ृ ቈ ᇳ न ु ि ᇳ म ष ि ᇳ न ि म ष ᇳ न ि प
	
।
इ ि ᇳ द ् र य ा ण ी ि ᇳ द ् र य ा थ ᆹ ष ु
	
व त ᆼ ᇳ त
	
इ ि त
	
ध ा र य न ्
	
॥
९
॥
naiva	kiñcit	karomīti
yukto	manyeta	tattva-vit
paśyañ	śṛṇvan	spṛśañ	jighrann
aśnan	gacchan	svapan	śvasan
pralapan	visṛjan	gṛhṇann
unmiṣan	nimiṣann	api
indriyāṇīndriyārtheṣu
vartanta	iti	dhārayan
na—
never;	
eva—
certainly;	
kiñcit—
anything;	
karomi—
do	I	do;	
iti—
thus;
yuktaḥ—
engaged	in	the	divine	consciousness;	
manyeta—
thinks;	
tattvavit—
one	who	knows	the	truth;	
paśyan—
by	seeing;	
śṛṇvan—
by	hearing;	
spṛśan—
by
touching;	
jighran—
by	smelling;	
aśnan—
by	eating;	
gacchan—
by	going;
svapan—
by	dreaming;	
śvasan—
by	breathing;	
pralapan—
by	talking;	
visṛjan—
by	giving	up;	
gṛhṇan—
by	accepting;	
unmiṣan—
opening;	
nimiṣan—
closing;
api—
in	spite	of;	
indriyāṇi—
the	senses;	
indriya-artheṣu—
in	sense	gratification;
vartante—
let	them	be	so	engaged;	
iti—
thus;	
dhārayan—
considering.
TRANSLATION
A	person	in	the	divine	consciousness,	although	engaged	in	seeing,hearing,	touching,	smelling,	eating,	moving	about,	sleeping,	and
breathing,	always	knows	within	himself	that	he	actually	does	nothing	at
all.	Because	while	speaking,	evacuating,	receiving,	opening	or	closing	his
eyes,	he	always	knows	that	only	the	material	senses	are	engaged	with
their	objects	and	that	he	is	aloof	from	them.
PURPORT
A	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	pure	in	his	existence,	and	consequently
he	has	nothing	to	do	with	any	work	which	depends	upon	five	immediate	and
remote	causes:	the	doer,	the	work,	the	situation,	the	endeavor	and	fortune.
This	is	because	he	is	engaged	in	the	loving	transcendental	service	of	Kṛṣṇa.
Although	he	appears	to	be	acting	with	his	body	and	senses,	he	is	always
conscious	of	his	actual	position,	which	is	spiritual	engagement.	In	material
consciousness,	the	senses	are	engaged	in	sense	gratification,	but	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	the	senses	are	engaged	in	the	satisfaction	of	Kṛṣṇa's	senses.
Therefore,	the	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	is	always	free,	even	though	he	appears
to	be	engaged	in	things	of	the	senses.	Activities	such	as	seeing,	hearing,
speaking,	evacuating,	etc.,	are	actions	of	the	senses	meant	for	work.	A	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	person	is	never	affected	by	the	actions	of	the	senses.	He	cannot
perform	any	act	except	in	the	service	of	the	Lord	because	he	knows	that	he	is
the	eternal	servitor	of	the	Lord.
TEXT	10
ब ् र ቊ ᇯ य ा ध ा य
	
क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
स ङ ् ग ं
	
ᇰ य ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
क र ो ि त
	
य ः
	
।
ि ल ᇴ य त े
	
न
	
स
	
प ा प े न
	
प द ् म प त ् र ि म व ा ᇸ भ स ा
	
॥
१ ०
॥
brahmaṇy	ādhāya	karmāṇi
saṅgaṁ	tyaktvā	karoti	yaḥ
lipyate	na	sa	pāpena
padma-patram	ivāmbhasā
brahmaṇi—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead;	
ādhāya—
resigning	unto;
karmāṇi—
all	works;	
saṅgam—
attachment;	
tyaktvā—
giving	up;	
karoti
—
performs;	
yaḥ—
who;	
lipyate—
is	affected;	
na—
never;	
saḥ—
he;	
pāpena—
by
sin;	
padma-patram—
lotus	leaf;	
iva—
like;	
ambhasā—
in	the	water.TRANSLATION
One	who	performs	his	duty	without	attachment,	surrendering	the
results	unto	the	Supreme	God,	is	not	affected	by	sinful	action,	as	the	lotus
leaf	is	untouched	by	water.
PURPORT
Here	
brahmaṇi	
means	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	The	material	world	is	a	sum
total	manifestation	of	the	three	modes	of	material	nature,	technically	called	the
pradhāna.	
The	Vedic	hymns,	
sarvam	etad	brahma,	tasmād	etad	brahma
nāma-rūpam	annaṁ	ca	jāyate,	
and,	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā,	mama	yonir	mahad
brahma,	
indicate	that	everything	in	the	material	world	is	the	manifestation	of
Brahman;	and,	although	the	effects	are	differently	manifested,	they	are
nondifferent	from	the	cause.	In	the	
Īśopaniṣad	
it	is	said	that	everything	is
related	to	the	Supreme	Brahman	or	Kṛṣṇa,	and	thus	everything	belongs	to	Him
only.	One	who	knows	perfectly	well	that	everything	belongs	to	Kṛṣṇa,	that	He
is	the	proprietor	of	everything	and	that,	therefore,	everything	is	engaged	in	the
service	of	the	Lord,	naturally	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	results	of	his
activities,	whether	virtuous	or	sinful.	Even	one's	material	body,	being	a	gift	of
the	Lord	for	carrying	out	a	particular	type	of	action,	can	be	engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	It	is	beyond	contamination	by	sinful	reactions,	exactly	as	the
lotus	leaf,	though	remaining	in	the	water,	is	not	wet.	The	Lord	also	says	in	the
Gītā:	mayi	sarvāṇi	karmāṇi	sannyasya:	
"Resign	all	works	unto	Me	[Kṛṣṇa]."
The	conclusion	is	that	a	person	without	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	acts	according	to
the	concept	of	the	material	body	and	senses,	but	a	person	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	acts	according	to	the	knowledge	that	the	body	is	the	property	of
Kṛṣṇa	and	should	therefore	be	engaged	in	the	service	of	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	11
क ा य े न
	
म न स ा
	
ब ु ሬ ᆸ ा
	
क े व ल ै ि र ि ᇳ द ् र य ै र ि प
	
।
य ो ि ग न ः
	
क म ᆼ
	
क ु व ᆼ ि ᇳ त
	
स ङ ् ग ं
	
ᇰ य ᇧ ᇰ व ा ᇰ म श ु ሬ य े
	
॥
१ १
॥
kāyena	manasā	buddhyā
kevalair	indriyair	apiyoginaḥ	karma	kurvanti
saṅgaṁ	tyaktvātma-śuddhaye
kāyena—
with	the	body;	
manasā—
with	the	mind;	
buddhyā—
with	the
intelligence;	
kevalaiḥ—
purified;	
indriyaiḥ—
with	the	senses;	
api—
even	with;
yoginaḥ—
the	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	persons;	
karma—
actions;	
kurvanti—
they	act;
saṅgam—
attachment;	
tyaktvā—
giving	up;	
ātma—
self;	
śuddhaye—
for	the
purpose	of	purification.
TRANSLATION
The	yogīs,	abandoning	attachment,	act	with	body,	mind,	intelligence,
and	even	with	the	senses,	only	for	the	purpose	of	purification.
PURPORT
By	acting	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	for	the	satisfaction	of	the	senses	of	Kṛṣṇa,
any	action,	whether	of	the	body,	mind,	intelligence	or	even	of	the	senses,	is
purified	of	material	contamination.	There	are	no	material	reactions	resulting
from	the	activities	of	a	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person.	Therefore,	purified	activities,
which	are	generally	called	
sadācāra
,	can	be	easily	performed	by	acting	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Śrī	Rūpa	Gosvāmī	in	his	
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-	sindhu
describes	this	as	follows:
īhā	yasya	harer	dāsye	karmaṇā	manasā	girā
nikhilāsv	apy	avasthāsu	jīvanmuktaḥ	sa	ucyate
A	person	acting	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	(or,	in	other	words,	in	the	service	of
Kṛṣṇa)	with	his	body,	mind,	intelligence	and	words	is	a	liberated	person	even
within	the	material	world,	although	he	may	be	engaged	in	many	so-called
material	activities.	He	has	no	false	ego,	nor	does	he	believe	that	he	is	this
material	body,	nor	that	he	possesses	the	body.	He	knows	that	he	is	not	this
body	and	that	this	body	does	not	belong	to	him.	He	himself	belongs	to	Kṛṣṇa,
and	the	body	too	belongs	to	Kṛṣṇa.	When	he	applies	everything	produced	of
the	body,	mind,	intelligence,	words,	life,	wealth,	etc.–whatever	he	may	have
within	his	possession–to	Kṛṣṇa's	service,	he	is	at	once	dovetailed	with	Kṛṣṇa.
He	is	one	with	Kṛṣṇa	and	is	devoid	of	the	false	ego	that	leads	one	to	believe
that	he	is	the	body,	etc.	This	is	the	perfect	stage	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.TEXT	12
य ु ᇧ त ः
	
क म ᆼ फ ल ं
	
ᇰ य ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
श ा ि ᇳ त म ा ᇴ न ो ि त
	
न ै ि ᇾ ठ क ी म ्
	
।
अ य ु ᇧ त ः
	
क ा म क ा र े ण
	
फ ल े
	
स ᇧ त ो
	
ि न ब ᇲ य त े
	
॥
१ २
॥
yuktaḥ	karma-phalaṁ	tyaktvā
śāntim	āpnoti	naiṣṭhikīm
ayuktaḥ	kāma-kāreṇa
phale	sakto	nibadhyate
yuktaḥ—
one	who	is	engaged	in	devotional	service;	
karma-phalam—
the
results	of	all	activities;	
tyaktvā—
giving	up;	
śāntim—
perfect	peace;	
āpnoti—
achieves;	
naiṣṭhikīm—
unflinching;	
ayuktaḥ—
one	who	is	not	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness;	
kāma-kāreṇa—
for	enjoying	the	result	of	work;	
phale—
in	the
result;	
saktaḥ—
attached;	
nibadhyate—
becomes	entangled.
TRANSLATION
The	steadily	devoted	soul	attains	unadulterated	peace	because	he	offers
the	result	of	all	activities	to	Me;	whereas	a	person	who	is	not	in	union
with	the	Divine,	who	is	greedy	for	the	fruits	of	his	labor,	becomes
entangled.
PURPORT
The	difference	between	a	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	a	person	in
bodily	consciousness	is	that	the	former	is	attached	to	Kṛṣṇa,	whereas	the	latter
is	attached	to	the	results	of	his	activities.	The	person	who	is	attached	to	Kṛṣṇa
and	works	for	Him	only	is	certainly	a	liberated	person,	and	he	is	not	anxious
for	fruitive	rewards.	In	the	
Bhāgavatam,	
the	cause	of	anxiety	over	the	result	of
an	activity	is	explained	as	being	due	to	one's	functioning	in	the	conception	of
duality,	that	is,	without	knowledge	of	the	Absolute	Truth.	Kṛṣṇa	is	the
Supreme	Absolute	Truth,	the	Personality	of	Godhead.	In	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,
there	is	no	duality.	All	that	exists	is	a	product	of	Kṛṣṇa's	energy,	and	Kṛṣṇa	is
all	good.	Therefore,	activities	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	are	on	the	absolute
plane;	they	are	transcendental	and	have	no	material	effect.	One	is,	therefore,filled	with	peace	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	One	who	is,	however,	entangled	in
profit	calculation	for	sense	gratification	cannot	have	that	peace.	This	is	the
secret	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness
—
realization	that	there	is	no	existence	besides
Kṛṣṇa	is	the	platform	of	peace	and	fearlessness.
TEXT	13
स व ᆼ क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
म न स ा
	
स ं ᇳ य ᇿ य ा ᇿ त े
	
स ु ख ं
	
व श ी
	
।
न व ሲ ा र े
	
प ु र े
	
द े ह ी
	
न ै व
	
क ु व ᆼ ᇳ न
	
क ा र य न ्
	
॥
१ ३
॥
sarva-karmāṇi	manasā
sannyasyāste	sukhaṁ	vaśī
nava-dvāre	pure	dehī
naiva	kurvan	na	kārayan
sarva—
all;	
karmāṇi—
activities;	
manasā—
by	the	mind;	
sannyasya—
giving
up;
	āste—
remains;	
sukham—
in	happiness;	
vaśī—
one	who	is	controlled;	
nava-
dvāre—
in	the	place	where	there	are	nine	gates;
	pure—
in	the	city;	
dehī	
—the
embodied	soul;	
na—
never;	
eva—
certainly;	
kurvan—
doing	anything;	
na—
not;
kārayan—
causing	to	be	done.
TRANSLATION
When	the	embodied	living	being	controls	his	nature	and	mentally
renounces	all	actions,	he	resides	happily	in	the	city	of	nine	gates	[the
material	body],	neither	working	nor	causing	work	to	be	done.
PURPORT
The	embodied	soul	lives	in	the	city	of	nine	gates.	The	activities	of	the	body,
or	the	figurative	city	of	body,	are	conducted	automatically	by	the	particular
modes	of	nature.	The	soul,	although	subjecting	himself	to	the	conditions	of	the
body,	can	be	beyond	those	conditions,	if	he	so	desires.	Owing	only	to
forgetfulness	of	his	superior	nature,	he	identifies	with	the	material	body,	and
therefore	suffers.	By	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	he	can	revive	his	real	position	and
thus	come	out	of	his	embodiment.	Therefore,	when	one	takes	to	Kṛṣṇaconsciousness,	one	at	once	becomes	completely	aloof	from	bodily	activities.
In	such	a	controlled	life,	in	which	his	deliberations	are	changed,	he	lives
happily	within	the	city	of	nine	gates.	The	nine	gates	are	described	as	follows:
nava-dvāre	pure	dehī	haṁso	lelāyate	bahiḥ
vaśī	sarvasya	lokasya	sthāvarasya	carasya	ca.
"The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	who	is	living	within	the	body	of	a
living	entity,	is	the	controller	of	all	living	entities	all	over	the	universe.	The
body	consists	of	nine	gates:	two	eyes,	two	nostrils,	two	ears,	one	mouth,	the
anus	and	the	genital.	The	living	entity	in	his	conditioned	stage	identifies
himself	with	the	body,	but	when	he	identifies	himself	with	the	Lord	within
himself,	he	becomes	just	as	free	as	the	Lord,	even	while	in	the	body."	(
Śvet.
3.18)
Therefore,	a	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	is	free	from	both	the	outer	and	inner
activities	of	the	material	body.
TEXT	14
न
	
क त ृ ᆼ ᇰ व ं
	
न
	
क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
ल ो क ᇿ य
	
स ृ ज ि त
	
प ् र भ ु ः
	
।
न
	
क म ᆼ फ ल स ं य ो ग ं
	
ᇿ व भ ा व ᇿ त ु
	
प ् र व त ᆼ त े
	
॥
१ ४
॥
na	kartṛtvaṁ	na	karmāṇi
lokasya	sṛjati	prabhuḥ
na	karma-phala-saṁyogaṁ
svabhāvas	tu	pravartate
na—
never;	
kartṛtvam—
proprietorship;	
na—
nor;	
karmāṇi—
activities;
lokasya—
of	the	people;	
sṛjati—
creates;	
prabhuḥ—
the	master	of	the	city	of	the
body;	
na—
nor;	
karma-phala—
results	of	activities;	
saṁyogam—
connection;
svabhāvaḥ—
modes	of	material	nature;	
tu—
but;	
pravartate—
acts.
TRANSLATION
The	embodied	spirit,	master	of	the	city	of	his	body,	does	not	create
activities,	nor	does	he	induce	people	to	act,	nor	does	he	create	the	fruits	of
action.	All	this	is	enacted	by	the	modes	of	material	nature.PURPORT
The	living	entity,	as	will	be	explained	in	the	Seventh	Chapter,	is	one	in
nature	with	the	Supreme	Lord,	distinguished	from	matter,	which	is	another
nature
—
called	inferior
—
of	the	Lord.	Somehow,	the	superior	nature,	the	living
entity,	has	been	in	contact	with	material	nature	since	time	immemorial.	The
temporary	body	or	material	dwelling	place	which	he	obtains	is	the	cause	of
varieties	of	activities	and	their	resultant	reactions.	Living	in	such	a	conditional
atmosphere,	one	suffers	the	results	of	the	activities	of	the	body	by	identifying
himself	(in	ignorance)	with	the	body.	It	is	ignorance	acquired	from	time
immemorial	that	is	the	cause	of	bodily	suffering	and	distress.	As	soon	as	the
living	entity	becomes	aloof	from	the	activities	of	the	body,	he	becomes	free
from	the	reactions	as	well.	As	long	as	he	is	in	the	city	of	body,	he	appears	to
be	the	master	of	it,	but	actually	he	is	neither	its	proprietor	nor	controller	of	its
actions	and	reactions.	He	is	simply	in	the	midst	of	the	material	ocean,
struggling	for	existence.	The	waves	of	the	ocean	are	tossing	him,	and	he	has
no	control	over	them.	His	best	solution	is	to	get	out	of	the	water	by
transcendental	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	That	alone	will	save	him	from	all
turmoil.
TEXT	15
न ा द ሧ े
	
क ᇿ य
	
ि च ᇰ प ा प ं
	
न
	
च ै व
	
स ु क ृ त ं
	
ि व भ ु ः
	
।
अ ᇥ ा न े न ा व ृ त ं
	
ᇥ ा न ं
	
त े न
	
म ु ቋ ि ᇳ त
	
ज ᇳ त व ः
	
॥
१ ५
॥
nādatte	kasyacit	pāpaṁ
na	caiva	sukṛtaṁ	vibhuḥ
ajñānenāvṛtaṁ	jñānaṁ
tena	muhyanti	jantavaḥ
na—
never;	
ādatte—
accepts;	
kasyacit—
anyone's;	
pāpam—
sin;	
na—
nor;	
ca
—	
also;	
eva—
certainly;	
sukṛtam—
pious	activities;	
vibhuḥ—
the	Supreme	Lord;
ajñānena—
by	ignorance;	
āvṛtam—
covered;	
jñānam—
knowledge;	
tena—
by
that;	
muhyanti—
bewildered;	
jantavaḥ—
the	living	entities.
TRANSLATIONNor	does	the	Supreme	Spirit	assume	anyone's	sinful	or	pious	activities.
Embodied	beings,	however,	are	bewildered	because	of	the	ignorance
which	covers	their	real	knowledge.
PURPORT
The	Sanskrit	word	
vibhuḥ	
means	the	Supreme	Lord	who	is	full	of	unlimited
knowledge,	riches,	strength,	fame,	beauty	and	renunciation.	He	is	always
satisfied	in	Himself,	undisturbed	by	sinful	or	pious	activities.	He	does	not
create	a	particular	situation	for	any	living	entity,	but	the	living	entity,
bewildered	by	ignorance,	desires	to	be	put	into	certain	conditions	of	life,	and
thereby	his	chain	of	action	and	reaction	begins.	A	living	entity	is,	by	superior
nature,	full	of	knowledge.	Nevertheless,	he	is	prone	to	be	influenced	by
ignorance	due	to	his	limited	power.	The	Lord	is	omnipotent,	but	the	living
entity	is	not.	The	Lord	is	
vibhu,	
or	omniscient,	but	the	living	entity	is	
aṇu
,	or
atomic.	Because	he	is	a	living	soul,	he	has	the	capacity	to	desire	by	his	free
will.	Such	desire	is	fulfilled	only	by	the	omnipotent	Lord.	And	so,	when	the
living	entity	is	bewildered	in	his	desires,	the	Lord	allows	him	to	fulfill	those
desires,	but	the	Lord	is	never	responsible	for	the	actions	and	reactions	of	the
particular	situation	which	may	be	desired.	Being	in	a	bewildered	condition,
therefore,	the	embodied	soul	identifies	himself	with	the	circumstantial
material	body	and	becomes	subjected	to	the	temporary	misery	and	happiness
of	life.	The	Lord	is	the	constant	companion	of	the	living	entity	as	Paramātmā,
or	the	Supersoul,	and	therefore	He	can	understand	the	desires	of	the	individual
soul,	as	one	can	smell	the	flavor	of	a	flower	by	being	near	it.	Desire	is	a	subtle
form	of	conditioning	of	the	living	entity.	The	Lord	fulfills	his	desire	as	he
deserves:	Man	proposes	and	God	disposes.	The	individual	is	not,	therefore,
omnipotent	in	fulfilling	his	desires.	The	Lord,	however,	can	fulfill	all	desires,
and	the	Lord,	being	neutral	to	everyone,	does	not	interfere	with	the	desires	of
the	minute	independant	living	entities.	However,	when	one	desires	Kṛṣṇa,	the
Lord	takes	special	care	and	encourages	one	to	desire	in	such	a	way	that	one
can	attain	to	Him	and	be	eternally	happy.	The	Vedic	hymn	therefore	declares:
eṣa	u	hy	eva	sādhu	karma	kārayati	taṁ	yamebhyo	lokebhya	unninīṣate
eṣa	u	evāsādhu	karma	kārayati	yamadho	ninīṣate.
ajño	jantur	anīṣo	'yam	ātmanaḥ	sukha-duḥkhayoḥ
īśvara-prerito	gacchet	svargaṁ	vāśvabhram	eva	ca."The	Lord	engages	the	living	entity	in	pious	activities	so	he	may	be	elevated.
The	Lord	engages	him	in	impious	activities	so	he	may	go	to	hell.	The	living
entity	is	completely	dependant	in	his	distress	and	happiness.	By	the	will	of	the
Supreme	he	can	go	to	heaven	or	hell,	as	a	cloud	is	driven	by	the	air."
Therefore	the	embodied	soul,	by	his	immemorial	desire	to	avoid	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	causes	his	own	bewilderment.	Consequently,	although	he	is
constitutionally	eternal,	blissful	and	cognizant,	due	to	the	littleness	of	his
existence	he	forgets	his	constitutional	position	of	service	to	the	Lord	and	is
thus	entrapped	by	nescience.	And,	under	the	spell	of	ignorance,	the	living
entity	claims	that	the	Lord	is	responsible	for	his	conditional	existence.	The
Vedānta-sūtras	
also	confirm	this:
vaiṣamya-nairghṛṇye	na	sāpekṣatvāt	tathā	hi	darśayati.
"The	Lord	neither	hates	nor	likes	anyone,	though	He	appears	to."
TEXT	16
ᇥ ा न े न
	
त ु
	
त द ᇥ ा न ं
	
य े ष ा ं
	
न ा ि श त म ा ᇰ म न ः
	
।
त े ष ा म ा ि द ᇰ य व ᇬ ᇥ ा न ं
	
प ् र क ा श य ि त
	
त ᇰ प र म ्
	
॥
५
-	
१ ६
jñānena	tu	tad	ajñānaṁ
yeṣāṁ	nāśitam	ātmanaḥ
teṣām	ādityavaj	jñānaṁ
prakāśayati	tat	param
jñānena—
by	knowledge;	
tu—
but;	
tat—
that;	
ajñānam—
nescience;	
yeṣām
—
of	those;	
nāśitam—
is	destroyed;	
ātmanaḥ—
of	the	living	entity;	
teṣām—
of
their;	
ādityavat—
like	the	rising	sun;	
jñānam—
knowledge;	
prakāśayati
—
discloses;	
tat	param—
in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
TRANSLATION
When,	however,	one	is	enlightened	with	the	knowledge	by	which
nescience	is	destroyed,	then	his	knowledge	reveals	everything,	as	the	sun
lights	up	everything	in	the	daytime.PURPORT
Those	who	have	forgotten	Kṛṣṇa	must	certainly	be	bewildered,	but	those
who	are	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	are	not	bewildered	at	all.	It	is	stated	in	the
Bhagavad-gītā,	"sarvaṁ	jñāna-plavena,"	"jñānāgniḥ	sarva	karmāṇi"	
and	"
na
hi	jñānena	sadṛśam."	
Knowledge	is	always	highly	esteemed.	And	what	is	that
knowledge?	Perfect	knowledge	is	achieved	when	one	surrenders	unto	Kṛṣṇa,
as	is	said	in	the	Seventh	Chapter,	19th	verse:	
bahūnāṁ	janmanām	ante
jñānavān	māṁ	prapadyate.	
After	passing	through	many,	many	births,	when
one	perfect	in	knowledge	surrenders	unto	Kṛṣṇa,	or	when	one	attains	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	then	everything	is	revealed	to	him,	as	the	sun	reveals
everything	in	the	daytime.	The	living	entity	is	bewildered	in	so	many	ways.
For	instance,	when	he	thinks	himself	God,	unceremoniously,	he	actually	falls
into	the	last	snare	of	nescience.	If	a	living	entity	is	God,	then	how	can	he
become	bewildered	by	nescience?	Does	God	become	bewildered	by
nescience?	If	so,	then	nescience,	or	Satan,	is	greater	than	God.	Real
knowledge	can	be	obtained	from	a	person	who	is	in	perfect	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	Therefore,	one	has	to	seek	out	such	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master
and,	under	him,	learn	what	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is.	The	spiritual	master	can
drive	away	all	nescience,	as	the	sun	drives	away	darkness.	Even	though	a
person	may	be	in	full	knowledge	that	he	is	not	this	body	but	is	transcendental
to	the	body,	he	still	may	not	be	able	to	discriminate	between	the	soul	and	the
Supersoul.	However,	he	can	know	everything	well	if	he	cares	to	take	shelter	of
the	perfect,	bona	fide	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	spiritual	master.	One	can	know	God
and	one's	relationship	with	God	only	when	one	actually	meets	a	representative
of	God.	A	representative	of	God	never	claims	that	he	is	God,	although	he	is
paid	all	the	respect	ordinarily	paid	to	God	because	he	has	knowledge	of	God.
One	has	to	learn	the	distinction	between	God	and	the	living	entity.	Lord	Śrī
Kṛṣṇa	therefore	stated	in	the	Second	Chapter	(2.12)	that	every	living	being	is
individual	and	that	the	Lord	also	is	individual.	They	were	all	individuals	in	the
past,	they	are	individuals	at	present,	and	they	will	continue	to	be	individuals	in
the	future,	even	after	liberation.	At	night	we	see	everything	as	one	in	the
darkness,	but	in	day	when	the	sun	is	up,	we	see	everything	in	its	real	identity.
Identity	with	individuality	in	spiritual	life	is	real	knowledge.
TEXT	17त ሮ ु ሬ य ᇿ त द ा ᇰ म ा न ᇿ त ि ᇳ न ᇾ ठ ा ᇿ त ᇰ प र ा य ण ा ः
	
।
ग ᇫ छ ᇳ ᇰ य प ु न र ा व ृ ि ሧ ं
	
ᇥ ा न ि न ध ू ᆼ त क ᇺ म ष ा ः
	
॥
१ ७
॥
tad-buddhayas	tad-ātmānas
tan-niṣṭhās	tat-parāyaṇāḥ
gacchanty	apunar-āvṛttiṁ
jñāna-nirdhūta-kalmaṣāḥ
tad-buddhayaḥ—
one	whose	intelligence	is	always	in	the	Supreme;	
tad-
ātmānaḥ—
one	whose	mind	is	always	in	the	Supreme;	
tat-niṣṭhāḥ—
whose
mind	is	only	meant	for	the	Supreme;	
tat-parāyaṇāḥ—
who	has	completely
taken	shelter	of	Him;	
gacchanti—
goes;	
apunaḥ-āvṛttim—
liberation;	
jñāna—
knowledge;	
nirdhūta—
cleanses;	
kalmaṣāḥ—
misgivings.
TRANSLATION
When	one's	intelligence,	mind,	faith	and	refuge	are	all	fixed	in	the
Supreme,	then	one	becomes	fully	cleansed	of	misgivings	through	complete
knowledge	and	thus	proceeds	straight	on	the	path	of	liberation.
PURPORT
The	Supreme	Transcendental	Truth	is	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.	The	whole	
Bhagavad-
gītā	
centers	around	the	declaration	of	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.	That	is	the	version	of	all	Vedic	literature.	
Paratattva	
means	the
Supreme	Reality,	who	is	understood	by	the	knowers	of	the	Supreme	as
Brahman,	Paramātmā	and	Bhagavān.	Bhagavān,	or	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead,	is	the	last	word	in	the	Absolute.	There	is	nothing	more	than
that.The	Lord	says,	
mattaḥ	parataraṁ	nānyat	kiñcit	asti	dhanañjaya.
Impersonal	Brahman	is	also	supported	by	Kṛṣṇa:	
brahmaṇo	pratiṣṭhāham.
Therefore	in	all	ways	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme	Reality.	One	whose	mind,
intelligence,	faith	and	refuge	are	always	in	Kṛṣṇa,	or,	in	other	words,	one	who
is	fully	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	is	undoubtedly	washed	clean	of	all	misgivings
and	is	in	perfect	knowledge	in	everything	concerning	transcendence.	A	Kṛṣṇa
conscious	person	can	thoroughly	understand	that	there	is	duality
(simultaneous	identity	and	individuality)	in	Kṛṣṇa,	and,	equipped	with	such
transcendental	knowledge,	one	can	make	steady	progress	on	the	path	ofliberation.
TEXT	18
ि व ሱ ा ि व न य स ᇸ प ᇳ न े
	
ब ् र ा ቊ ण े
	
ग ि व
	
ह ि ᇿ त ि न
	
।
श ु ि न
	
च ै व
	
ᇽ व प ा क े
	
च
	
प ि ᇯ ड त ा ः
	
स म द ि श ᆼ न ः
	
॥
१ ८
॥
vidyā-vinaya-sampanne
brāhmaṇe	gavi	hastini
śuni	caiva	śvapāke	ca
paṇḍitāḥ	sama-darśinaḥ
vidyā—
education;	
vinaya—
gentleness;	
sampanne—
fully	equipped;
brāhmaṇe—
in	the	
brāhmaṇa;	gavi—
in	the	cow;	
hastini—
in	the	elephant;	
śuni
—
in	the	dog;	
ca—
and;	
eva—
certainly;	
śvapāke—
in	the	dog-eater	(the
outcaste);	
ca—
respectively;	paṇḍitāḥ-those	who	are	so	wise;	
sama-darśinaḥ
—do	see	with	equal	vision.
TRANSLATION
The	humble	sage,	by	virtue	of	true	knowledge,	sees	with	equal	vision	a
learned	and	gentle	brāhmaṇa,	a	cow,	an	elephant,	a	dog	and	a	dog-eater
[outcaste]	.
PURPORT
A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	does	not	make	any	distinction	between	species	or
castes.	The	
brāhmaṇa	
and	the	outcaste	may	be	different	from	the	social	point
of	view,	or	a	dog,	a	cow,	or	an	elephant	may	be	different	from	the	point	of
view	of	species,	but	these	differences	of	body	are	meaningless	from	the
viewpoint	of	a	learned	transcendentalist.	This	is	due	to	their	relationship	to	the
Supreme,	for	the	Supreme	Lord,	by	His	plenary	portion	as	Paramātmā,	is
present	in	everyone's	heart.	Such	an	understanding	of	the	Supreme	is	real
knowledge.	As	far	as	the	bodies	are	concerned	in	different	castes	or	different
species	of	life,	the	Lord	is	equally	kind	to	everyone	because	He	treats	every
living	being	as	a	friend	yet	maintains	Himself	as	Paramātmā	regardless	of	thecircumstances	of	the	living	entities.	The	Lord	as	Paramātmā	is	present	both	in
the	outcaste	and	in	the	
brāhmaṇa,	
although	the	body	of	a	
brāhmaṇa	
and	that
of	an	outcaste	are	not	the	same.	The	bodies	are	material	productions	of
different	modes	of	material	nature,	but	the	soul	and	the	Supersoul	within	the
body	are	of	the	same	spiritual	quality.	The	similarity	in	the	quality	of	the	soul
and	the	Supersoul,	however,	does	not	make	them	equal	in	quantity,	for	the
individual	soul	is	present	only	in	that	particular	body,	whereas	the	Paramātmā
is	present	in	each	and	every	body.	A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	has	full
knowledge	of	this,	and	therefore	he	is	truly	learned	and	has	equal	vision.	The
similar	characteristics	of	the	soul	and	Supersoul	are	that	they	are	both
conscious,	eternal	and	blissful.	But	the	difference	is	that	the	individual	soul	is
conscious	within	the	limited	jurisdiction	of	the	body,	whereas	the	Supersoul	is
conscious	of	all	bodies.	The	Supersoul	is	present	in	all	bodies	without
distinction.
TEXT	19
इ ह ै व
	
त ै ि ज ᆼ त ः
	
स ग ो ᆼ
	
य े ष ा ं
	
स ा ᇸ य े
	
ि ᇿ थ त ं
	
म न ः
	
।
ि न द ो ᆼ ष ं
	
ि ह
	
स म ं
	
ब ् र ቊ
	
त ᇿ म ा द ्
	
ब ् र ቊ ि ण
	
त े
	
ि ᇿ थ त ा ः
	
॥
१ ९
ihaiva	tair	jitaḥ	sargo
yeṣāṁ	sāmye	sthitaṁ	manaḥ
nirdoṣaṁ	hi	samaṁ	brahma
tasmād	brahmaṇi	te	sthitāḥ
iha—
in	this	life;	
eva—
certainly;	
taiḥ—
by	them;	
jitaḥ—
conquered;	
sargaḥ—
birth	and	death;	
yeṣām—
of	those;	
sāmye—
in	equanimity;	
sthitam—
so	situated;
manaḥ—
mind;	
nirdoṣam—
flawless;	
hi—
certainly;	
samam—
in	equanimity;
brahma—
the	Supreme;	
tasmāt—
therefore;	
brahmaṇi—
in	the	Supreme;	
te
—
they;	
sthitāḥ—
are	situated.
TRANSLATION
Those	whose	minds	are	established	in	sameness	and	equanimity	have
already	conquered	the	conditions	of	birth	and	death.	They	are	flawless
like	Brahman,	and	thus	they	are	already	situated	in	Brahman.PURPORT
Equanimity	of	mind,	as	mentioned	above,	is	the	sign	of	self-realization.
Those	who	have	actually	attained	to	such	a	stage	should	be	considered	to	have
conquered	material	conditions,	specifically	birth	and	death.	As	long	as	one
identifies	with	this	body,	he	is	considered	a	conditioned	soul,	but	as	soon	as	he
is	elevated	to	the	stage	of	equanimity	through	realization	of	self,	he	is
liberated	from	conditional	life.	In	other	words,	he	is	no	longer	subject	to	take
birth	in	the	material	world	but	can	enter	into	the	spiritual	sky	after	his	death.
The	Lord	is	flawless	because	He	is	without	attraction	or	hatred.	Similarly,
when	a	living	entity	is	without	attraction	or	hatred,	he	also	becomes	flawless
and	eligible	to	enter	into	the	spiritual	sky.	Such	persons	are	to	be	considered
already	liberated,	and	their	symptoms	are	described	below.
TEXT	20
न
	
प ् र ᇦ ᇾ य े ि ᇰ प ् र य ं
	
प ् र ा ᇴ य
	
न ो द ् ि व ज े ᇰ प ् र ा ᇴ य
	
च ा ि प ् र य म ्
	
।
ि ᇿ थ र ब ु द ् ि ध र स ᇸ म ू ढ ो
	
ब ् र ቊ ि व ሮ ् र ቊ ि ण
	
ि ᇿ थ त ः
	
॥
२ ०
॥
na	prahṛṣyet	priyaṁ	prāpya
nodvijet	prāpya	cāpriyam
sthira-buddhir	asammūḍho
brahma-vid	brahmaṇi	sthitaḥ
na—
never;	
prahṛṣyet—
rejoice;	
priyam—
pleasant;	
prāpya—
achieving;	
na—
does	not;	
udvijet—
agitated;	
prāpya—
obtaining;	
ca—
also;	
apriyam
—
unpleasant;	
sthira-buddhiḥ—
self-intelligent;	
asammūḍhaḥ—
unbewildered;
brahmavit—	
one	who	knows	the	Supreme	perfectly;	
brahmaṇi—
in	the
Transcendence;	
sthitaḥ—
situated.
TRANSLATION
A	person	who	neither	rejoices	upon	achieving	something	pleasant	nor
laments	upon	obtaining	something	unpleasant,	who	is	self-intelligent,
unbewildered,	and	who	knows	the	science	of	God,	is	to	be	understood	as
already	situated	in	Transcendence.PURPORT
The	symptoms	of	the	self-realized	person	are	given	herein.	The	first
symptom	is	that	he	is	not	illusioned	by	the	false	identification	of	the	body	with
his	true	self.	He	knows	perfectly	well	that	he	is	not	this	body,	but	is	the
fragmental	portion	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	He	is	therefore	not
joyful	in	achieving	something,	nor	does	he	lament	in	losing	anything	which	is
related	to	his	body.	This	steadiness	of	mind	is	called	
sthira-buddhi,	
or	self-
intelligence.	He	is	therefore	never	bewildered	by	mistaking	the	gross	body	for
the	soul,	nor	does	he	accept	the	body	as	permanent	and	disregard	the	existence
of	the	soul.	This	knowledge	elevates	him	to	the	station	of	knowing	the
complete	science	of	the	Absolute	Truth,	namely	Brahman,	Paramātmā	and
Bhagavān.	He	thus	knows	his	constitutional	position	perfectly	well,	without
falsely	trying	to	become	one	with	the	Supreme	in	all	respects.	This	is	called
Brahman	realization,	or	self-	realization.	Such	steady	consciousness	is	called
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
TEXT	21
ब ा ቋ ᇿ प श ᆹ ᇾ व स ᇧ त ा ᇰ म ा
	
ि व ᇳ द ᇰ य ा ᇰ म ि न
	
य ᇰ स ु ख म ्
	
।
स
	
ब ् र ቊ य ो ग य ु ᇧ त ा ᇰ म ा
	
स ु ख म ᇤ य म ᇽ न ु त े
	
॥
२ १
॥
bāhya-sparśeṣv	asaktātmā
vindaty	ātmani	yat	sukham
sa	brahma-yoga-yuktātmā
sukham	akṣayam	aśnute
bāhya-sparśeṣu—
in	external	sense	pleasure;	
asakta-ātmā—
one	who	is	not
so	attached;	
vindati—
enjoys;	
ātmani—
in	the	self;	
yat—
that	which;	
sukham
—
happiness;	
saḥ—
that;	
brahma-yoga—
concentrated	in	Brahman;	
yukta-	ātmā
—
self-connected;	
sukham—
happiness;	
akṣayam—
unlimited;	
aśnute—	
enjoys.
TRANSLATION
Such	a	liberated	person	is	not	attracted	to	material	sense	pleasure	or
external	objects	but	is	always	in	trance,	enjoying	the	pleasure	within.	Inthis	way	the	self-realized	person	enjoys	unlimited	happiness,	for	he
concentrates	on	the	Supreme.
PURPORT
Śrī	Yāmunācārya,	a	great	devotee	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	said:
yadāvadhi	mama	cetaḥ	kṛṣṇa-padāravinde
nava-nava-rasa-dhāmanudyata	rantum	āsīt
tadāvadhi	bata	nārī-saṅgame	smaryamāne
bhavati	mukha-vikāraḥ	suṣṭu	niṣṭhīvanaṁ	ca
"Since	I	have	been	engaged	in	the	transcendental	loving	service	of	Kṛṣṇa,
realizing	ever-new	pleasure	in	Him,	whenever	I	think	of	sex	pleasure,	I	spit	at
the	thought,	and	my	lips	curl	with	distaste."	A	person	in	
brahma-yoga,	
or
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	is	so	absorbed	in	the	loving	service	of	the	Lord	that	he
loses	his	taste	for	material	sense	pleasure	altogether.	The	highest	pleasure	in
terms	of	matter	is	sex	pleasure.	The	whole	world	is	moving	under	its	spell,
and	a	materialist	cannot	work	at	all	without	this	motivation.	But	a	person
engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	can	work	with	greater	vigor	without	sex
pleasure,	which	he	avoids.	That	is	the	test	in	spiritual	realization.	Spiritual
realization	and	sex	pleasure	go	ill	together.	A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	is	not
attracted	to	any	kind	of	sense	pleasure	due	to	his	being	a	liberated	soul.
TEXT	22
य े
	
ि ह
	
स ं ᇿ प श ᆼ ज ा
	
भ ो ग ा
	
द ु ः ख य ो न य
	
ए व
	
त े
	
।
आ ሱ ᇳ त व ᇳ त ः
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
न
	
त े ष ु
	
र म त े
	
ब ु ध ः
	
॥
२ २
॥
ye	hi	saṁsparśajā	bhogā
duḥkha-yonaya	eva	te
ādy-antavantaḥ	kaunteya
na	teṣu	ramate	budhaḥ
ye—
those;	
hi—
certainly;	
saṁsparśajāḥ—
by	contact	with	the	material
senses;	
bhogāḥ—
enjoyment;	
duḥkha—
distress;	
yonayaḥ—
sources	of;	
eva—
certainly;	
te—
they	are;	
ādi—
in	the	beginning;	
antavantaḥ—
subject	to;kaunteya—
O	son	of	Kuntī;	
na—
never;	
teṣu—
in	those;	
ramate—
take	delight;
budhaḥ—
the	intelligent.
TRANSLATION
An	intelligent	person	does	not	take	part	in	the	sources	of	misery,	which
are	due	to	contact	with	the	material	senses.	O	son	of	Kuntī,	such
pleasures	have	a	beginning	and	an	end,	and	so	the	wise	man	does	not
delight	in	them.
PURPORT
Material	sense	pleasures	are	due	to	the	contact	of	the	material	senses,	which
are	all	temporary	because	the	body	itself	is	temporary.	A	liberated	soul	is	not
interested	in	anything	which	is	temporary.	Knowing	well	the	joys	of
transcendental	pleasures,	how	can	a	liberated	soul	agree	to	enjoy	false
pleasure?	In	the
	Padma	Purāṇa	
it	is	said:
ramante	yogino	'nante	satyānanda-cid-ātmani
iti	rāma-padenāsau	paraṁ	brahmābhidhīyate
"The	mystics	derive	unlimited	transcendental	pleasures	from	the	Absolute
Truth,	and	therefore	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth,	the	Personality	of	Godhead,
is	also	known	as	Rāma."
In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
also	it	is	said:
nāyaṁ	deho	deha-bhājāṁ	nṛ-loke
kaṣṭān	kāmānarhate	viḍ-bhujāṁ	ye
tapo	divyaṁ	putrakā	yena	sattvaṁ
śuddhyed	yasmād	brahma-saukhyaṁ	tv	anantam.
"My	dear	sons,	there	is	no	reason	to	labor	very	hard	for	sense	pleasure	while
in	this	human	form	of	life;	such	pleasures	are	available	to	the	stool-eaters
[hogs].	Rather,	you	should	undergo	penances	in	this	life	by	which	your
existence	will	be	purified,	and,	as	a	result,	you	will	be	able	to	enjoy	unlimited
transcendental	bliss."	
(Bhāg.	
5.5.1)
Therefore,	those	who	are	true	
yogīs	
or	learned	transcendentalists	are	notattracted	by	sense	pleasures,	which	are	the	causes	of	continuous	material
existence.	The	more	one	is	addicted	to	material	pleasures,	the	more	he	is
entrapped	by	material	miseries.
TEXT	23
श ᇧ न ो त ी ह ै व
	
य ः
	
स ो ढ ु ं
	
प ् र ा ᇧ श र ी र ि व म ो ᇤ ण ा त ्
	
।
क ा म क ् र ो ध ो द ् भ व ं
	
व े ग ं
	
स
	
य ु ᇧ त ः
	
स
	
स ु ख ी
	
न र ः
	
॥
२ ३
॥
śaknotīhaiva	yaḥ	soḍhuṁ
prāk	śarīra-vimokṣaṇāt
kāma-krodhodbhavaṁ	vegaṁ
sa	yuktaḥ	sa	sukhī	naraḥ
śaknoti—
able	to	do;	
iha	eva—
in	the	present	body;	
yaḥ—
one	who;	
soḍhum
—
to	tolerate;	
prāk—
before;	
śarīra—
body;	
vimokṣaṇāt—
giving	up;	
kāma
—
desire;	
krodha—
anger;	
udbhavam—
generated	from;	
vegam—
urge;	
saḥ—
he;
yuktaḥ—
in	trance;	
saḥ—
he;	
sukhī—
happy;	
naraḥ—
human	being.
TRANSLATION
Before	giving	up	this	present	body,	if	one	is	able	to	tolerate	the	urges	of
the	material	senses	and	check	the	force	of	desire	and	anger,	he	is	a	yogī
and	is	happy	in	this	world.
PURPORT
If	one	wants	to	make	steady	progress	on	the	path	of	self-realization,	he	must
try	to	control	the	forces	of	the	material	senses.	There	are	the	forces	of	talk,
forces	of	anger,	forces	of	mind,	forces	of	the	stomach,	forces	of	the	genitals,
and	forces	of	the	tongue.	One	who	is	able	to	control	the	forces	of	all	these
different	senses,	and	the	mind,	is	called	
gosvāmī,	
or	
svāmī.	
Such	
gosvāmīs	
live
strictly	controlled	lives,	and	forego	altogether	the	forces	of	the	senses.
Material	desires,	when	unsatiated,	generate	anger,	and	thus	the	mind,	eyes	and
chest	become	agitated.	Therefore,	one	must	practice	to	control	them	before
one	gives	up	this	material	body.	One	who	can	do	this	is	understood	to	be	self-realized	and	is	thus	happy	in	the	state	of	self-realization.	It	is	the	duty	of	the
transcendentalist	to	try	strenuously	to	control	desire	and	anger.
TEXT	24
य ो ऽ ᇳ त ः स ु ख ो ऽ ᇳ त र ा र ा म ᇿ त थ ा ᇳ त ᇬ य ो ᆼ ि त र े व
	
य ः
	
।
स
	
य ो ग ी
	
ब ् र ቊ ि न व ा ᆼ ण ं
	
ब ् र ቊ भ ू त ो ऽ ि ध ग ᇫ छ ि त
	
॥
२ ४
॥
yo	'ntaḥ-sukho	'ntarārāmas
tathāntar-jyotir	eva	yaḥ
sa	yogī	brahma-nirvāṇaṁ
brahma-bhūto	'dhigacchati
yaḥ—
one	who;	
antaḥ-sukhaḥ—
happy	from	within;	
antaḥ-ārāmah—
active
within;	
tathā—
as	well	as;	
antaḥ-jyotiḥ—
aiming	within;	
eva—
certainly;	
yaḥ
—
anyone;	
saḥ—
he;	
yogī—
mystic;	
brahma-nirvāṇam—
liberated	in	the
Supreme;	
brahma-bhūtaḥ—
self-realized;	
adhigacchati—
attains.
TRANSLATION
One	whose	happiness	is	within,	who	is	active	within,	who	rejoices
within	and	is	illumined	within,	is	actually	the	perfect	mystic.	He	is
liberated	in	the	Supreme,	and	ultimately	he	attains	the	Supreme.
PURPORT
Unless	one	is	able	to	relish	happiness	from	within,	how	can	one	retire	from
the	external	engagements	meant	for	deriving	superficial	happiness?	A
liberated	person	enjoys	happiness	by	factual	experience.	He	can,	therefore,	sit
silently	at	any	place	and	enjoy	the	activities	of	life	from	within.	Such	a
liberated	person	no	longer	desires	external	material	happiness.	This	state	is
called	
brahma-bhūta,	
attaining	which	one	is	assured	of	going	back	to
Godhead,	back	to	home.
TEXT	25ल भ ᇳ त े
	
ब ् र ቊ ि न व ा ᆼ ण म ृ ष य ः
	
ᇤ ी ण क ᇺ म ष ा ः
	
।
ि छ ᇳ न ሲ ै ध ा
	
य त ा ᇰ म ा न ः
	
स व ᆼ भ ू त ि ह त े
	
र त ा ः
	
॥
२ ५
॥
labhante	brahma-nirvāṇam
ṛṣayaḥ	kṣīṇa-kalmaṣāḥ
chinna-dvaidhā	yatātmānaḥ
sarva-bhūta-hite	ratāḥ
labhante—
achieve;	
brahma-nirvāṇam—
liberation	in	the	Supreme;	
ṛṣayaḥ
—
those	who	are	active	within;	
kṣīṇa-kalmaṣāḥ—
who	are	devoid	of	all	sins;
chinna—
torn	off;	
dvaidhāḥ—
duality;	
yata-ātmānaḥ—
engaged	in	self-
realization;	
sarva-bhūta—
in	all	living	entities;	
hite—
in	welfare	work;	
ratāḥ—
engaged.
TRANSLATION
One	who	is	beyond	duality	and	doubt,	whose	mind	is	engaged	within,
who	is	always	busy	working	for	the	welfare	of	all	sentient	beings,	and	who
is	free	from	all	sins,	achieves	liberation	in	the	Supreme.
PURPORT
Only	a	person	who	is	fully	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	can	be	said	to	be
engaged	in	welfare	work	for	all	living	entities.	When	a	person	is	actually	in
the	knowledge	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	fountainhead	of	everything,	then	when	he	acts
in	that	spirit	he	acts	for	everyone.	The	sufferings	of	humanity	are	due	to
forgetfulness	of	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	supreme	enjoyer,	the	supreme	proprietor,	and	the
supreme	friend.	Therefore,	to	act	to	revive	this	consciousness	within	the	entire
human	society	is	the	highest	welfare	work.	One	cannot	be	engaged	in	first-
class	welfare	work	without	being	liberated	in	the	Supreme.	A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious
person	has	no	doubt	about	the	supremacy	of	Kṛṣṇa.	He	has	no	doubt	because
he	is	completely	freed	from	all	sins.	This	is	the	state	of	divine	love.
A	person	engaged	only	in	ministering	to	the	physical	welfare	of	human
society	cannot	factually	help	anyone.	Temporary	relief	of	the	external	body
and	the	mind	is	not	satisfactory.	The	real	cause	of	one's	difficulties	in	the	hard
struggle	for	life	may	be	found	in	one's	forgetfulness	of	his	relationship	with
the	Supreme	Lord.	When	a	man	is	fully	conscious	of	his	relationship	withKṛṣṇa,	he	is	actually	a	liberated	soul,	although	he	may	be	in	the	material
tabernacle.
TEXT	26
क ा म क ् र ो ध ि व म ु ᇧ त ा न ा ं
	
य त ी न ा ं
	
य त च े त स ा म ्
	
।
अ ि भ त ो
	
ब ् र ቊ ि न व ा ᆼ ण ं
	
व त ᆼ त े
	
ि व ि द त ा ᇰ म न ा म ्
	
॥
२ ६
॥
kāma-krodha-vimuktānāṁ
yatīnāṁ	yata-cetasām
abhito	brahma-nirvāṇaṁ
vartate	viditātmanām
kāma—
desires;	
krodha—
anger;	
vimuktānām—
of	those	who	are	so	liberated;
yatīnām—
of	the	saintly	persons;	
yata-cetasām—
of	persons	who	have	full
control	over	the	mind;	
abhitaḥ—
assured	in	the	near	future;	
brahma-	nirvāṇam
—
liberation	in	the	Supreme;	
vartate—
is	there;	
vidita-ātmanām—
of	those	who
are	self-realized.
TRANSLATION
Those	who	are	free	from	anger	and	all	material	desires,	who	are
selfrealized,	self-disciplined	and	constantly	endeavoring	for	perfection,
are	assured	of	liberation	in	the	Supreme	in	the	very	near	future.
PURPORT
Of	the	saintly	persons	who	are	constantly	engaged	in	striving	toward
salvation,	one	who	is	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	the	best	of	all.	The
Bhāgavatam	
confirms	this	fact	as	follows:
yat-pāda-paṅkaja-palāśa-vilāsa-bhaktyā
karmāśayaṁ	grathitam	udgrathayanti	santaḥ
tadvan	na	rikta-matayo	yatayo	'pi	ruddha-
srotogaṇās	tam	araṇaṁ	bhaja	vāsudevam."Just	try	to	worship,	in	devotional	service,	Vāsudeva,	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead.	Even	great	sages	are	not	able	to	control	the	forces	of	the	senses
as	effectively	as	those	who	are	engaged	in	transcendental	bliss	by	serving	the
lotus	feet	of	the	Lord,	uprooting	the	deep	grown	desire	for	fruitive	activities."
(Bhāg.
	4.22.39)
In	the	conditioned	soul	the	desire	to	enjoy	the	fruitive	results	of	work	is	so
deep-rooted	that	it	is	very	difficult	even	for	the	great	sages	to	control	such
desires,	despite	great	endeavors.	A	devotee	of	the	Lord,	constantly	engaged	in
devotional	service	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	perfect	in	self-realization,	very
quickly	attains	liberation	in	the	Supreme.	Owing	to	his	complete	knowledge	in
self-realization,	he	always	remains	in	trance.	To	cite	an	analagous	example	of
this:
darśana-dhyāna-saṁsparśair	matsya-kūrma-vihaṅgamāḥ
svānya	patyāni	puṣṇanti	tathāham	api	padmaja.
"By	vision,	by	meditation	and	by	touch	only	do	the	fish,	the	tortoise	and	the
birds	maintain	their	offspring.	Similarly	do	I	also,	O	Padmaja!"
The	fish	brings	up	its	offspring	simply	by	looking	at	them.	The	tortoise
brings	up	its	offspring	simply	by	meditation.	The	eggs	of	the	tortoise	are	laid
on	land,	and	the	tortoise	meditates	on	the	eggs	while	in	the	water.	Similarly,	a
devotee	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	although	far	away	from	the	Lord's	abode,	can
elevate	himself	to	that	abode	simply	by	thinking	of	Him	constantly-by
engagement	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	He	does	not	feel	the	pangs	of	material
miseries;	this	state	of	life	is	called	
brahma-nirvāṇa,	
or	the	absence	of	material
miseries	due	to	being	constantly	immersed	in	the	Supreme.
TEXTS	27-28
ᇿ प श ा ᆼ ᇳ क ृ ᇰ व ा
	
ब ि ह ब ा ᆼ ቋ ा ं ᇽ च ᇤ ु ᇽ च ै व ा ᇳ त र े
	
भ ् ኄ व ो ः
	
।
प ् र ा ण ा प ा न ौ
	
स म ौ
	
क ृ ᇰ व ा
	
न ा स ा ᇷ य ᇳ त र च ा ि र ण ौ
	
॥
२ ७
॥
य त े ि ᇳ द ् र य म न ो ब ु द ् ि ध म ु ᆼ ि न म ो ᆼ ᇤ प र ा य ण ः
	
।
ि व ग त े ᇫ छ ा भ य क ् र ो ध ो
	
य ः
	
स द ा
	
म ु ᇧ त
	
ए व
	
स ः
	
॥
२ ८
॥
sparśān	kṛtvā	bahir	bāhyāṁś
cakṣuś	caivāntare	bhruvoḥ
prāṇāpānau	samau	kṛtvā
nāsābhyantara-cāriṇauyatendriya-mano-buddhir
munir	mokṣa-parāyaṇaḥ
vigatecchā-bhaya-krodho
yaḥ	sadā	mukta	eva	saḥ
sparśān—
external	sense	objects,	such	as	sound,	etc.;	
kṛtvā—
doing	so;	
bahiḥ
—
external;	
bāhyān—
unnecessary;	
cakṣuḥ—
eyes;	
ca—
also;	
eva—
certainly;
antare—
within;	
bhruvoḥ—
of	the	eyebrows;	
prāṇa-apānau—
up-and	down-
moving	air;	
samau—
in	suspension;	
kṛtvā—
doing	so;	
nāsā-abhyantara
—
within	the	nostrils;	
cāriṇau—
blowing;	
yata—
controlled;	
indriya—
senses;
manaḥ—
mind;	
buddhiḥ—
intelligence;	
muniḥ—
the	transcendentalist;	
mokṣa	
—
liberation;	
parāyaṇaḥ—
being	so	destined;	
vigata—
discarded;	
icchā—
wishes;
bhaya—
fear;	
krodhaḥ—
anger;
	yaḥ—
one	who;	
sadā—
always;	
muktaḥ
—
liberated;	
eva—
certainly;	
saḥ—
he	is.
TRANSLATION
Shutting	out	all	external	sense	objects,	keeping	the	eyes	and	vision
concentrated	between	the	two	eyebrows,	suspending	the	inward	and
outward	breaths	within	the	nostrils-thus	controlling	the	mind,	senses	and
intelligence,	the	tranecendentalist	becomes	free	from	desire,	fear	and
anger.	One	who	is	always	in	this	state	is	certainly	liberated.
PURPORT
Being	engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	one	can	immediately	understand
one's	spiritual	identity,	and	then	one	can	understand	the	Supreme	Lord	by
means	of	devotional	service.	When	he	is	well	situated	in	devotional	service,
one	comes	to	the	transcendental	position,	qualified	to	feel	the	presence	of	the
Lord	in	the	sphere	of	one's	activity.	This	particular	position	is	called	liberation
in	the	Supreme.
After	explaining	the	above	principles	of	liberation	in	the	Supreme,	the	Lord
gives	instruction	to	Arjuna	as	to	how	one	can	come	to	that	position	by	the
practice	of	mysticism	or	
yoga,	
known	as	
aṣṭāṅga-yoga,	
which	is	divisible	into
an	eightfold	procedure	called	
yama,	niyama,	āsana,	prāṇāyāma,	pratyāhāra,
dhāraṇā,	dhyāna,	
and	
samādhi.	
In	the	Sixth	Chapter	the	subject	of	
yoga
	is
explicitly	detailed,	and	at	the	end	of	the	Fifth	it	is	only	preliminarilyexplained.	One	has	to	drive	out	the	sense	objects	such	as	sound,	touch,	form,
taste	and	smell	by	the	
pratyāhāra
	(breathing)	process	in	
yoga,	
and	then	keep
the	vision	of	the	eyes	between	the	two	eyebrows	and	concentrate	on	the	tip	of
the	nose	with	half	closed	lids.	There	is	no	benefit	in	closing	the	eyes
altogether,	because	then	there	is	every	chance	of	falling	asleep.	Nor	is	there
benefit	in	opening	the	eyes	completely,	because	then	there	is	the	hazard	of
being	attracted	by	sense	objects.	The	breathing	movement	is	restrained	within
the	nostrils	by	neutralizing	the	up-	and	down-moving	air	within	the	body.	By
practice	of	such	
yoga	
one	is	able	to	gain	control	over	the	senses,	refrain	from
outward	sense	objects,	and	thus	prepare	oneself	for	liberation	in	the	Supreme.
This	
yoga	
process	helps	one	become	free	from	all	kinds	of	fear	and	anger
and	thus	feel	the	presence	of	the	Supersoul	in	the	transcendental	situation.	In
other	words,	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	the	easiest	process	of	executing	
yoga
principles.	This	will	be	thoroughly	explained	in	the	next	chapter.	A	Kṛṣṇa
conscious	person,	however,	being	always	engaged	in	devotional	service,	does
not	risk	losing	his	senses	to	some	other	engagement.	This	is	a	better	way	of
controlling	the	senses	than	by	the	
aṣṭāṅga-yoga
.
TEXT	29
भ ो ᇧ त ा र ं
	
य ᇥ त प स ा ं
	
स व ᆼ ल ो क म ह े ᇽ व र म ्
	
।
स ु ᇦ द ं
	
स व ᆼ भ ू त ा न ा ं
	
ᇥ ा ᇰ व ा
	
म ा ं
	
श ा ि ᇳ त म ृ ᇫ छ ि त
	
॥
२ ९
॥
bhoktāraṁ	yajña-tapasāṁ
sarva-loka-maheśvaram
suhṛdaṁ	sarva-bhūtānāṁ
jñātvā	māṁ	śāntim	ṛcchati
bhoktāram—
beneficiary;	
yajña—
sacrifices;	
tapasām—
of	penances	and
austerities;	
sarva-loka—
all	planets	and	the	demigods	thereof;	
maheśvaram—
the	Supreme	Lord;	
suhṛdam—
benefactor;	
sarva—
all;	
bhūtānām—
of	the	living
entities;	
jñātvā—
thus	knowing;	
mām—
Me	(Lord	Kṛṣṇa);	
śāntim—	
relief	from
material	pangs;	
ṛcchati—
achieves.
TRANSLATION
The	sages,	knowing	Me	as	the	ultimate	purpose	of	all	sacrifices	andausterities,	the	Supreme	Lord	of	all	planets	and	demigods	and	the
benefactor	and	well-wisher	of	all	living	entities,	attain	peace	from	the
pangs	of	material	miseries.
PURPORT
The	conditioned	souls	within	the	clutches	of	illusory	energy	are	all	anxious
to	attain	peace	in	the	material	world.	But	they	do	not	know	the	formula	for
peace,	which	is	explained	in	this	part	of	the	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
The	greatest	peace
formula	is	simply	this:	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	beneficiary	in	all	human	activities.
Men	should	offer	everything	to	the	transcendental	service	of	the	Lord	because
He	is	the	proprietor	of	all	planets	and	the	demigods	thereon.	No	one	is	greater
than	He.	He	is	greater	than	the	greatest	of	the	demigods,	Lord	Śiva	and	Lord
Brahmā.	In	the	
Vedas
	the	Supreme	Lord	is	described	as	
tam	īśvarāṇāṁ
paramam	maheśvaram.	
Under	the	spell	of	illusion,	living	entities	are	trying	to
be	lords	of	all	they	survey,	but	actually	they	are	dominated	by	the	material
energy	of	the	Lord.	The	Lord	is	the	master	of	material	nature,	and	the
conditioned	souls	are	under	the	stringent	rules	of	material	nature.	Unless	one
understands	these	bare	facts,	it	is	not	possible	to	achieve	peace	in	the	world
either	individually	or	collectively.	This	is	the	sense	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness:
Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	supreme	predominator,	and	all	living	entities,	including	the
great	demigods,	are	His	subordinates.	One	can	attain	perfect	peace	only	in
complete	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
This	Fifth	Chapter	is	a	practical	explanation	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,
generally	known	as	
karma-yoga.	
The	question	of	mental	speculation	as	to	how
karma-yoga	
can	give	liberation	is	answered	herewith.	To	work	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	to	work	with	the	complete	knowledge	of	the	Lord	as	the
predominator.	Such	work	is	not	different	from	transcendental	knowledge.
Direct	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	
bhakti-yoga,	
and	
jñāna-yoga	
is	a	path	leading
to	
bhakti-yoga.	
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	means	to	work	in	full	knowledge	of	one's
relationship	with	the	Supreme	Absolute,	and	the	perfection	of	this
consciousness	is	full	knowledge	of	Kṛṣṇa,	or	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.	A	pure	soul	is	the	eternal	servant	of	God	as	His	fragmental	part	and
parcel.	He	comes	into	contact	with	
māyā
	(illusion)	due	to	the	desire	to	lord	it
over	
māyā
,	and	that	is	the	cause	of	his	many	sufferings.	As	long	as	he	is	in
contact	with	matter,	he	has	to	execute	work	in	terms	of	material	necessities.
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	however,	brings	one	into	spiritual	life	even	while	one	is
within	the	jurisdiction	of	matter,	for	it	is	an	arousing	of	spiritual	existence	bypractice	in	the	material	world.	The	more	one	is	advanced,	the	more	he	is	freed
from	the	clutches	of	matter.	The	Lord	is	not	partial	toward	anyone.	Everything
depends	on	one's	practical	performance	of	duties	in	an	effort	to	control	the
senses	and	conquer	the	influence	of	desire	and	anger.	And,	attaining	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	by	controlling	the	above-mentioned	passions,	one	remains
factually	in	the	transcendental	stage,	or	
brahman-nirvāṇa
.	The	eightfold	
yoga
mysticism	is	automatically	practiced	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	because	the
ultimate	purpose	is	served.	There	is	gradual	process	of	elevation	in	the
practice	of	
yama,	niyama,	āsana,	pratyāhāra,	dhyāna,	dhāraṇā,	prāṇāyāma
,
and	
samādhi.	
But	these	only	preface	perfection	by	devotional	service,	which
alone	can	award	peace	to	the	human	being.	It	is	the	highest	perfection	of	life.
Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	Fifth	Chapter	of	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhagavad-gītā
	in	the	matter	of
	Karma-yoga,
	or	Action	in	Kṛṣṇa
Consciousness.Chapter-6
CHAPTER	SIX
Sāṅkhya-yoga
TEXT	1
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
अ न ा ि श ् र त ः
	
क म ᆼ फ ल ं
	
क ा य ᆾ
	
क म ᆼ
	
क र ो ि त
	
य ः
	
।
स
	
स ं ᇳ य ा स ी
	
च
	
य ो ग ी
	
च
	
न
	
ि न र ि ᇩ न न ᆼ
	
च ा ि क ् र य ः
	
॥
१
॥
śrī-bhagavān	uvāca
anāśritaḥ	karma-phalaṁ
kāryaṁ	karma	karoti	yaḥ
sa	sannyāsī	ca	yogī	cana	niragnir	na	cākriyaḥ
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Lord	said;	
anāśritaḥ—
without	shelter;	
karma-
phalam—
the	result	of	work;	
kāryam—
obligatory;	
karma—
work;	
karoti—
performs;	
yaḥ—
one	who;	
saḥ—
he;	
sannyāsī—
in	the	renounced	order;	
ca—
also;	
yogī—
mystic;	
ca—
also;	
na—
not;	
nir—
without;	
agniḥ—
fire;	
na—
nor;	
ca
—
also;	
akriyaḥ—
without	duty.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	One	who	is	unattached	to	the	fruits	of	his	work
and	who	works	as	he	is	obligated	is	in	the	renounced	order	of	life,	and	he
is	the	true	mystic:	not	he	who	lights	no	fire	and	performs	no	work.
PURPORT
In	this	chapter	the	Lord	explains	that	the	process	of	the	eightfold	
yoga
system	is	a	means	to	control	the	mind	and	the	senses.	However,	this	is	very
difficult	for	people	in	general	to	perform,	especially	in	the	age	of	Kali.
Although	the	eightfold	
yoga	
system	is	recommended	in	this	chapter,	the	Lord
emphasizes	that	the	process	of	
karma-yoga,	
or	acting	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,
is	better.	Everyone	acts	in	this	world	to	maintain	his	family	and	their
paraphernalia,	but	no	one	is	working	without	some	self-interest,	some
personal	gratification,	be	it	concentrated	or	extended.	The	criterion	of
perfection	is	to	act	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	and	not	with	a	view	to	enjoying
the	fruits	of	work.	To	act	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	the	duty	of	every	living
entity	because	all	are	constitutionally	parts	and	parcels	of	the	Supreme.	The
parts	of	the	body	work	for	the	satisfaction	of	the	whole	body.	The	limbs	of	the
body	do	not	act	for	self-satisfaction	but	for	the	satisfaction	of	the	complete
whole.	Similarly,	the	living	entity	who	acts	for	satisfaction	of	the	supreme
whole	and	not	for	personal	satisfaction	is	the	perfect	
sannyāsī,	
the	perfect
yogī
.
The	
sannyāsīs	
sometimes	artificially	think	that	they	have	become	liberated
from	all	material	duties,	and	therefore	they	cease	to	perform	
agnihotra	yajñas
(fire	sacrifices),	but	actually	they	are	self-interested	because	their	goal	is
becoming	one	with	the	impersonal	Brahman.	Such	a	desire	is	greater	than	any
material	desire,	but	it	is	not	without	self-interest.	Similarly,	the	mystic	
yogīwho	practices	the	
yoga	
system	with	half-open	eyes,	ceasing	all	material
activities,	desires	some	satisfaction	for	his	personal	self.	But	a	person	acting	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	works	for	the	satisfaction	of	the	whole,	without	self-
interest.	A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	has	no	desire	for	self-satisfaction.	His
criterion	of	success	is	the	satisfaction	of	Kṛṣṇa,	and	thus	he	is	the	perfect
sannyāsī,	
or	perfect	
yogī.	
Lord	Caitanya,	the	highest	perfectional	symbol	of
renunciation,	prays	in	this	way:
na	dhanaṁ	na	janaṁ	na	sundarīṁ	kavitāṁ	vā	jagadīśa	kāmaye.
mama	janmani	janmanīśvare	bhavatād	bhaktir	ahaitukī	tvayi.
"O	Almighty	Lord,	I	have	no	desire	to	accumulate	wealth,	nor	to	enjoy
beautiful	women.	Nor	do	I	want	any	number	of	followers.	What	I	want	only	is
the	causeless	mercy	of	Your	devotional	service	in	my	life,	birth	after	birth."
TEXT	2
य ं
	
स ं ᇳ य ा स ि म ि त
	
प ् र ा ह ु य ो ᆼ ग ं
	
त ं
	
ि व द ् ि ध
	
प ा ᇯ ड व
	
।
न
	
ቋ स ं ᇳ य ᇿ त स ङ ् क ᇺ प ो
	
य ो ग ी
	
भ व ि त
	
क ᇽ च न
	
॥
२
॥
yaṁ	sannyāsam	iti	prāhur
yogaṁ	taṁ	viddhi	pāṇḍava
na	hy	asannyasta-saṅkalpo
yogī	bhavati	kaścana
yam—
what;	
sannyāsam—
renunciation;	
iti—
thus;	
prāhuḥ—
they	say;	
yogam
—
linking	with	the	Supreme;	
tam—
that;	
viddhi—
you	must	know;	
pāṇḍava—
O
son	of	Pāṇḍu;	
na—
never;	
hi—
certainly;	
asannyasta—
without	giving	up;
saṅkalpaḥ—
self-satisfaction;	
yogī—
a	mystic	transcendentalist;	
bhavati
—
becomes;	
kaścana—
anyone.
TRANSLATION
What	is	called	renunciation	is	the	same	as	yoga,	or	linking	oneself	with
the	Supreme,	for	no	one	can	become	a	yogī	unless	he	renounces	the	desire
for	sense	gratification.PURPORT
Real	
sannyāsa-yoga
	or	
bhakti	
means	that	one	should	know	his
constitutional	position	as	the	living	entity,	and	act	accordingly.	The	living
entity	has	no	separate	independant	identity.	He	is	the	marginal	energy	of	the
Supreme.	When	he	is	entrapped	by	material	energy,	he	is	conditioned,	and
when	he	is	Kṛṣṇa	conscious,	or	aware	of	the	spiritual	energy,	then	he	is	in	his
real	and	natural	state	of	life.	Therefore,	when	one	is	in	complete	knowledge,
one	ceases	all	material	sense	gratification,	or	renounces	all	kinds	of	sense
gratificatory	activities.	This	is	practiced	by	the	
yogīs
	who	restrain	the	senses
from	material	attachment.	But	a	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	has	no
opportunity	to	engage	his	senses	in	anything	which	is	not	for	the	purpose	of
Kṛṣṇa.	Therefore,	a	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	is	simultaneously	a	
sannyāsī	
and
a	
yogī.	
The	purpose	of	knowledge	and	of	restraining	the	senses,	as	prescribed
in	the	
jñāna	
and	
yoga	
processes,	is	automatically	served	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	If	one	is	unable	to	give	up	the	activities	of	his	selfish	nature,
then	
jñāna	
and	
yoga	
are	of	no	avail.	The	real	aim	is	for	a	living	entity	to	give
up	all	selfish	satisfaction	and	to	be	prepared	to	satisfy	the	Supreme.	A	Kṛṣṇa
conscious	person	has	no	desire	for	any	kind	of	self-	enjoyment.	He	is	always
engaged	for	the	enjoyment	of	the	Supreme.	One	who	has	no	information	of
the	Supreme	must	therefore	be	engaged	in	self-	satisfaction	because	no	one
can	stand	on	the	platform	of	inactivity.	All	these	purposes	are	perfectly	served
by	the	practice	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
TEXT	3
आ ኄ ኄ ᇤ ो म ु ᆼ न े य ो ᆼ ग ं
	
क म ᆼ
	
क ा र ण म ु ᇫ य त े
	
।
य ो ग ा ኅ ढ ᇿ य
	
त ᇿ य ै व
	
श म ः
	
क ा र ण म ु ᇫ य त े
	
॥
३
॥
ārurukṣor	muner	yogaṁ
karma	kāraṇam	ucyate
yogārūḍhasya	tasyaiva
śamaḥ	kāraṇam	ucyate
ārurukṣoḥ—
of	one	who	has	just	begun	
yoga;	muneḥ—
of	the	sage;	
yogam
—the	eightfold	
yoga	
system;	
karma—
work;	
kāraṇam—
the	cause;	
ucyate—
is
said	to	be;	
yoga—
eightfold	
yoga;	ārūḍhasya—
one	who	has	attained;	
tasya—his;	
eva—
certainly;	
śamaḥ—
cessation	of	all	material	activities;	
kāraṇam—
the
cause;	
ucyate—
is	said	to	be.
TRANSLATION
For	one	who	is	a	neophyte	in	the	eightfold	yoga	system,	work	is	said	to
be	the	means;	and	for	one	who	has	already	attained	to	yoga,	cessation	of
all	material	activities	is	said	to	be	the	means.
PURPORT
The	process	of	linking	oneself	with	the	Supreme	is	called	
yoga,	
which	may
be	compared	to	a	ladder	for	attaining	the	topmost	spiritual	realization.	This
ladder	begins	from	the	lowest	material	condition	of	the	living	entity	and	rises
up	to	perfect	self-realization	in	pure	spiritual	life.	According	to	various
elevations,	different	parts	of	the	ladder	are	known	by	different	names.	But	all
in	all,	the	complete	ladder	is	called	
yoga	
and	may	be	divided	into	three	parts,
namely	
jñāna-yoga,	dhyāna-yoga	
and	
bhakti-yoga.	
The	beginning	of	the
ladder	is	called	the	
yogārurukṣa	
stage,	and	the	highest	rung	is	called
yogārūḍha.
Concerning	the	eightfold	
yoga	
system,	attempts	in	the	beginning	to	enter
into	meditation	through	regulative	principles	of	life	and	practice	of	different
sitting	postures	(which	are	more	or	less	bodily	exercises)	are	considered
fruitive	material	activities.	All	such	activities	lead	to	achieving	perfect	mental
equilibrium	to	control	the	senses.	When	one	is	accomplished	in	the	practice	of
meditation,	he	ceases	all	disturbing	mental	activities.
A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	is,	however,	situated	from	the	beginning	on	the
platform	of	meditation	because	he	always	thinks	of	Kṛṣṇa.	And,	being
constantly	engaged	in	the	service	of	Kṛṣṇa,	he	is	considered	to	have	ceased	all
material	activities.
TEXT	4
य द ा
	
ि ह
	
न े ि ᇳ द ् र य ा थ ᆹ ष ु
	
न
	
क म ᆼ ᇿ व न ु ष ᇬ ज त े
	
।
	
स व ᆼ स ङ ् क ᇺ प स ं ᇳ य ा स ी
	
य ो ग ा ኅ ढ ᇿ त द ो ᇫ य त े
	
॥
४
॥yadā	hi	nendriyārtheṣu
na	karmasv	anuṣajjate
sarva-saṅkalpa-sannyāsī
yogārūḍhas	tadocyate
yadā—
when;	
hi—
certainly;	
na—
not;	
indriya-artheṣu—
in	sense
gratification;	
na—
never;	
karmasu—
in	fruitive	activities;	
anuṣajjate—
does
necessarily	engage;	
sarva-saṅkalpa—
all	material	desires;	
sannyāsī
—
renouncer;	
yoga-	ārūḍhaḥ—
elevated	in	
yoga;	tadā—
at	that	time;	
ucyate—
is
said	to	be.
TRANSLATION
A	person	is	said	to	have	attained	to	yoga	when,	having	renounced	all
material	desires,	he	neither	acts	for	sense	gratification	nor	engages	in
fruitive	activities.
PURPORT
When	a	person	is	fully	engaged	in	the	transcendental	loving	service	of	the
Lord,	he	is	pleased	in	himself,	and	thus	he	is	no	longer	engaged	in	sense
gratification	or	in	fruitive	activities.	Otherwise,	one	must	be	engaged	in	sense
gratification,	since	one	cannot	live	without	engagement.	Without	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	one	must	be	always	seeking	self-centered	or	extended	selfish
activities.	But	a	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	can	do	everything	for	the	satisfaction
of	Kṛṣṇa	and	thereby	be	perfectly	detached	from	sense	gratification.	One	who
has	no	such	realization	must	mechanically	try	to	escape	material	desires
before	being	elevated	to	the	top	rung	of	the	
yoga
	ladder.
TEXT	5
उ ሬ र े द ा ᇰ म न ा ᇰ म ा न ं
	
न ा ᇰ म ा न म व स ा द य े त ्
	
।
आ ᇰ म ै व
	
ቋ ा ᇰ म न ो
	
ब ᇳ ध ु र ा ᇰ म ै व
	
ि र प ु र ा ᇰ म न ः
	
॥
५
॥
uddhared	ātmanātmānaṁ
nātmānam	avasādayetātmaiva	hy	ātmano	bandhur
ātmaiva	ripur	ātmanaḥ
uddharet—
one	must	deliver;	
ātmanā—
by	the	mind;	
ātmānam—
the
conditioned	soul;	
na—
never;	
ātmānam—
the	conditioned	soul;	
avasādayet
—
put	into	degradation;	
ātmā—
mind;	
eva—
certainly;	
hi—
indeed;	
ātmanaḥ—
of
the	conditioned	soul;	
bandhuḥ—
friend;	
ātmā—
mind;	
eva—
certainly;	
ripuḥ—
enemy;	
ātmanaḥ—
of	the	conditioned	soul.
TRANSLATION
A	man	must	elevate	himself	by	his	own	mind,	not	degrade	himself.	The
mind	is	the	friend	of	the	conditioned	soul,	and	his	enemy	as	well.
PURPORT
The	word	
ātmā
	denotes	body,	mind	and	soul–depending	upon	different
circumstances.	In	the	
yoga
	system,	the	mind	and	the	conditioned	soul	are
especially	important.	Since	the	mind	is	the	central	point	of	
yoga
	practice,	
ātmā
refers	here	to	the	mind.	The	purpose	of	the	
yoga
	system	is	to	control	the	mind
and	to	draw	it	away	from	attachment	to	sense	objects.	It	is	stressed	herein	that
the	mind	must	be	so	trained	that	it	can	deliver	the	conditioned	soul	from	the
mire	of	nescience.	In	material	existence	one	is	subjected	to	the	influence	of
the	mind	and	the	senses.	In	fact,	the	pure	soul	is	entangled	in	the	material
world	because	of	the	mind's	ego	which	desires	to	lord	it	over	material	nature.
Therefore,	the	mind	should	be	trained	so	that	it	will	not	be	attracted	by	the
glitter	of	material	nature,	and	in	this	way	the	conditioned	soul	may	be	saved.
One	should	not	degrade	oneself	by	attraction	to	sense	objects.	The	more	one	is
attracted	by	sense	objects,	the	more	one	becomes	entangled	in	material
existence.	The	best	way	to	disentangle	oneself	is	to	always	engage	the	mind	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	The	word	
hi	
isused	for	emphasizing	this	point,	i.e.,	that
one	
must	
do	this.	It	is	also	said:
mana	eva	manuṣyāṇāṁ	kāraṇaṁ	bandha-mokṣayoḥ
bandhāya	viṣayāsaṅgo	muktyai	nirviṣayaṁ	manaḥ.
"For	man,	mind	is	the	cause	of	bondage	and	mind	is	the	cause	of	liberation.Mind	absorbed	in	sense	objects	is	the	cause	of	bondage,	and	mind	detached
from	the	sense	objects	is	the	cause	of	liberation."	Therefore,	the	mind	which	is
always	engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	the	cause	of	supreme	liberation.
TEXT	6
ब ᇳ ध ु र ा ᇰ म ा ᇰ म न ᇿ त ᇿ य
	
य े न ा ᇰ म ै व ा ᇰ म न ा
	
ि ज त ः
	
।
अ न ा ᇰ म न ᇿ त ु
	
श त ्ኄ ᇰ व े
	
व त ᆹ त ा ᇰ म ै व
	
श त ्ኄ व त ्
	
॥
६
॥
bandhur	ātmātmanas	tasya
yenātmaivātmanā	jitaḥ
anātmanas	tu	śatrutve
vartetātmaiva	śatruvat
bandhuḥ—
friend;	
ātmā—
mind;	
ātmanaḥ—
of	the	living	entity;	
tasya—
of
him;	
yena—
by	whom;	
ātmā—
mind;	
eva—
certainly;	
ātmanā—
by	the	living
entity;	
jitaḥ—
conquered;	
anātmanaḥ—
of	one	who	has	failed	to	control	the
mind;	
tu—
but;	
śatrutve—
because	of	enmity;	
varteta—
remains;	
ātmā	eva—
the
very	mind;	
śatruvat—
as	an	enemy.
TRANSLATION
For	him	who	has	conquered	the	mind,	the	mind	is	the	best	of	friends;
but	for	one	who	has	failed	to	do	so,	his	very	mind	will	be	the	greatest
enemy.
PURPORT
The	purpose	of	practicing	eightfold	
yoga	
isto	control	the	mind	in	order	to
make	it	a	friend	in	discharging	the	human	mission.	Unless	the	mind	is
controlled,	the	practice	of	
yoga	
(for	show)	is	simply	a	waste	of	time.	One	who
cannot	control	his	mind	lives	always	with	the	greatest	enemy,	and	thus	his	life
and	its	mission	are	spoiled.	The	constitutional	position	of	the	living	entity	is	to
carry	out	the	order	of	the	superior.	As	long	as	one's	mind	remains	an
unconquered	enemy,	one	has	to	serve	the	dictations	of	lust,	anger,	avarice,
illusion,	etc.	But	when	the	mind	is	conquered,	one	voluntarily	agrees	to	abideby	the	dictation	of	the	Personality	of	Godhead,	who	is	situated	within	the	heart
of	everyone	as	Paramātmā.	Real	
yoga	
practice	entails	meeting	the	Paramātmā
within	the	heart	and	then	following	His	dictation.	For	one	who	takes	to	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	directly,	perfect	surrender	to	the	dictation	of	the	Lord	follows
automatically.
TEXT	7
ि ज त ा ᇰ म न ः
	
प ् र श ा ᇳ त ᇿ य
	
प र म ा ᇰ म ा
	
स म ा ि ह त ः
	
।
श ी त ो ᇾ ण स ु ख द ु ः ख े ष ु
	
त थ ा
	
म ा न ा प म ा न य ो ः
	
॥
७
॥
jitātmanaḥ	praśāntasya
paramātmā	samāhitaḥ
śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkheṣu
tathā	mānāpamānayoḥ
jita-ātmanaḥ—
of	one	who	has	conquered	his	mind;	
praśāntasya—
of	one
who	has	attained	tranquility	by	such	control	over	the	mind;	
paramātmā—
the
Supersoul;	
samāhitaḥ—
approached	completely;	
śīta—
cold;	
uṣṇa—
heat;	
sukha
—in	happiness;	
duḥkheṣu—
in	distress;	
tathā—
also;	
māna
—honor;
apamānayoḥ—
in	dishonor.
TRANSLATION
For	one	who	has	conquered	the	mind,	the	Supersoul	is	already	reached,
for	he	has	attained	tranquility.	To	such	a	man	happiness	and	distress,
heat	and	cold,	honor	and	dishonor	are	all	the	same.
PURPORT
Actually,	every	living	entity	is	intended	to	abide	by	the	dictation	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	who	is	seated	in	everyone's	heart	as
Paramātmā.	When	the	mind	is	misled	by	the	external	illusory	energy,	one
becomes	entangled	in	material	activities.	Therefore,	as	soon	as	one's	mind	is
controlled	through	one	of	the	
yoga
	systems,	one	is	to	be	considered	as	having
already	reached	the	destination.	One	has	to	abide	by	superior	dictation.	Whenone's	mind	is	fixed	on	the	superior	nature,	he	has	no	other	alternative	but	to
follow	the	dictation	of	the	Supreme.	The	mind	must	admit	some	superior
dictation	and	follow	it.	The	effect	of	controlling	the	mind	is	that	one
automatically	follows	the	dictation	of	the	Paramātmā	or	Supersoul.	Because
this	transcendental	position	is	at	once	achieved	by	one	who	is	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	the	devotee	of	the	Lord	is	unaffected	by	the	dualities	of
material	existence,	namely	distress	and	happiness,	cold	and	heat,	etc.	This
state	is	practical	
samādhi,	
or	absorption	in	the	Supreme.
TEXT	8
ᇥ ा न ि व ᇥ ा न त ृ ᇴ त ा ᇰ म ा
	
क ू ट ᇿ थ ो
	
ि व ि ज त े ि ᇳ द ् र य ः
	
।
य ु ᇧ त
	
इ ᇰ य ु ᇫ य त े
	
य ो ग ी
	
स म ल ो ᇾ ट ा ᇽ म क ा ᇮ च न ः
	
॥
८
॥
jñāna-vijñāna-tṛptātmā
kūṭastho	vijitendriyaḥ
yukta	ity	ucyate	yogī
sama-loṣṭrāśma-kāñcanaḥ
jñāna—
acquired	knowledge;	
vijñāna—
realized	knowledge;	
tṛpta—
satisfied;
ātmā
—living	entity;	
kūṭasthaḥ—
spiritually	situated;	
vijita-indriyaḥ—
sensually
controlled;	
yuktaḥ
—competent	for	self-realization;	
iti
—thus;	
ucyate
—is	said;
yogī
—the	mystic;	
sama
—equiposed;	
loṣṭra—
pebbles;	
aśma—
stone;	
kāñcanaḥ
—
gold.
TRANSLATION
A	person	is	said	to	be	established	in	self-realization	and	is	called	a	yogī
[or	mystic]	when	he	is	fully	satisfied	by	virtue	of	acquired	knowledge	and
realization.	Such	a	person	is	situated	in	transcendence	and	is	self-
controlled.	He	sees	everything—whether	it	be	pebbles,	stones	or	gold—as
the	same.
PURPORT
Book	knowledge	without	realization	of	the	Supreme	Truth	is	useless.	Thisis	stated	as	follows:
ataḥ	śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi	na	bhaved	grāhyam	indriyaiḥ
sevonmukhe	hi	jihvādau	svayam	eva	sphuraty	adaḥ.
"No	one	can	understand	the	transcendental	nature	of	the	name,	form,	quality
and	pastimes	of	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	through	his	materially	contaminated	senses.	Only
when	one	becomes	spiritually	saturated	by	transcendental	service	to	the	Lord
are	the	transcendental	name,	form,	quality	and	pastimes	of	the	Lord	revealed
to	him."	
(Padma	Purāṇa)
This	
Bhagavad-gītā	
is	the	science	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	No	one	can
become	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	simply	by	mundane	scholarship.	One	must	be
fortunate	enough	to	associate	with	a	person	who	is	in	pure	consciousness.	A
Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	has	realized	knowledge,	by	the	grace	of	Kṛṣṇa,
because	he	is	satisfied	with	pure	devotional	service.	By	realized	knowledge,
one	becomes	perfect.	By	transcendental	knowledge	one	can	remain	steady	in
his	convictions,	but	by	mere	academic	knowledge	one	can	be	easily	deluded
and	confused	by	apparent	contradictions.	It	is	the	realized	soul	who	is	actually
self-controlled	because	he	is	surrendered	to	Kṛṣṇa.	He	is	transcendental
because	he	has	nothing	to	do	with	mundane	scholarship.	For	him	mundane
scholarship	and	mental	speculation,	which	may	be	as	good	as	gold	to	others,
are	of	no	greater	value	than	pebbles	or	stones.
TEXT	9
स ु ᇦ ि ᇳ म त ् र ा य ु ᆼ द ा स ी न म ᇲ य ᇿ थ ሲ े ᇾ य ब ᇳ ध ु ष ु
	
।
स ा ध ु ᇾ व ि प
	
च
	
प ा प े ष ु
	
स म ब ु द ् ि ध ि व ᆼ ि श ᇾ य त े
	
॥
९
॥
suhṛn-mitrāry-udāsīna-
madhyastha-dveṣya-bandhuṣu
sādhuṣv	api	ca	pāpeṣu
sama-buddhir	viśiṣyate
suhṛt—
by	nature	a	well-wisher;	
mitra—
benefactor	with	affection;	
ari
—
enemy;	
udāsīna—
neutral	between	the	belligerents;	
madhyastha—
mediator
between	the	belligerents;	
dveṣya—
envious;	
bandhuṣu—
among	the	relatives	or
well-wishers;	
sādhuṣu—
unto	the	pious;	
api—
as	well	as;	
ca—
and;	
pāpeṣu
—unto	the	sinners;	
sama-buddhiḥ—
having	equal	intelligence;	
viśiṣyate
—is	far
advanced.
TRANSLATION
A	person	is	said	to	be	still	further	advanced	when	he	regards	all—the
honest	well-wisher,	friends	and	enemies,	the	envious,	the	pious,	the	sinner
and	those	who	are	indifferent	and	impartial-with	an	equal	mind.
TEXT	10
य ो ग ी
	
य ु ᇮ ज ी त
	
स त त म ा ᇰ म ा न ं
	
र ह ि स
	
ि ᇿ थ त ः
	
।
ए क ा क ी
	
य त ि च ሧ ा ᇰ म ा
	
ि न र ा श ी र प ि र ग ् र ह ः
	
॥
१ ०
॥
yogī	yuñjīta	satatam
ātmānaṁ	rahasi	sthitaḥ
ekākī	yata-cittātmā
nirāśīr	aparigrahaḥ
yogī
—a	transcendentalist;	
yuñjīta—
must	concentrate	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness;	
satatam—
constantly;	
ātmānam—
himself	(by	the	body,	mind
and	self);	
rahasi—
in	a	secluded	place;	
sthitaḥ—
being	so	situated;	
ekākī
—
alone;	
yata-cittātmā—
always	careful	in	mind;	
nirāśīḥ—
without	being
attracted	by	anything	else;	
aparigrahaḥ—
free	from	the	feeling	of
possessiveness.
TRANSLATION
A	transcendentalist	should	always	try	to	concentrate	his	mind	on	the
Supreme	Self;	he	should	live	alone	in	a	secluded	place	and	should	always
carefully	control	his	mind.	He	should	be	free	from	desires	and	feelings	of
possessiveness.
PURPORT
Kṛṣṇa	is	realized	in	different	degrees	as	Brahman,	Paramātmā	and	theSupreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	means,	concisely,	to
be	always	engaged	in	the	transcendental	loving	service	of	the	Lord.	But	those
who	are	attached	to	the	impersonal	Brahman	or	the	localized	Supersoul	are
also	partially	Kṛṣṇa	conscious,	because	impersonal	Brahman	is	the	spiritual
ray	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	Supersoul	is	the	all-pervading	partial	expansion	of	Kṛṣṇa.
Thus	the	impersonalist	and	the	meditator	are	also	indirectly	Kṛṣṇa	conscious.
A	directly	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	is	the	topmost	transcendentalist	because
such	a	devotee	knows	what	is	meant	by	Brahman	or	Paramātmā.	His
knowledge	of	the	Absolute	Truth	is	perfect,	whereas	the	impersonalist	and	the
meditative	
yogī
	are	imperfectly	Kṛṣṇa	conscious.
Nevertheless,	all	of	these	are	instructed	herewith	to	be	constantly	engaged
in	their	particular	pursuits	so	that	they	may	come	to	the	highest	perfection
sooner	or	later.	The	first	business	of	a	transcendentalist	is	to	keep	the	mind
always	on	Kṛṣṇa.	One	should	always	think	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	not	forget	Him	even
for	a	moment.	Concentration	of	the	mind	on	the	Supreme	is	called	
samādhi	
or
trance.	In	order	to	concentrate	the	mind,	one	should	always	remain	in
seclusion	and	avoid	disturbance	by	external	objects.	He	should	be	very	careful
to	accept	favorable	and	reject	unfavorable	conditions	that	affect	his
realization.	And,	in	perfect	determination,	he	should	not	hanker	after
unnecessary	material	things	that	entangle	him	by	feelings	of	possessiveness.
All	these	perfections	and	precautions	are	perfectly	executed	when	one	is
directly	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	because	direct	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	means
self-abnegation,	wherein	there	is	very	little	chance	for	material
possessiveness.	Śrīla	Rūpa	Gosvāmī	characterizes	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	in	this
way:
anāsaktasya	viṣayān	yathārham	upayuñjataḥ
nirbandhaḥ	kṛṣṇa-sambandhe	yuktaṁ	vairāgyam	ucyate
prāpañcikatayā	buddhyā	hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ
mumukṣubhiḥ	parityāgo	vairāgyaṁ	phalgu	kathyate.
(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu	2.255-256)
"When	one	is	not	attached	to	anything,	but	at	the	same	time	accepts
everything	in	relation	to	Kṛṣṇa,	one	is	rightly	situated	above	possessiveness.
On	the	other	hand,	one	who	rejects	everything	without	knowledge	of	its
relationship	to	Kṛṣṇa	is	not	as	complete	in	his	renunciation."
A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	well	knows	that	everything	belongs	to	Kṛṣṇa,	and
thus	he	is	always	free	from	feelings	of	personal	possession.	As	such,	he	has	nohankering	for	anything	on	his	own	personal	account.	He	knows	how	to	accept
things	in	favor	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	how	to	reject	things	unfavorable	to
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	He	is	always	aloof	from	material	things	because	he	is
always	transcendental,	and	he	is	always	alone,	having	nothing	to	do	with
persons	not	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Therefore	a	person	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	the	perfect	
yogī.
TEXTS	11-12
श ु च ौ
	
द े श े
	
प ् र ि त ᇾ ठ ा ᇴ य
	
ि ᇿ थ र म ा स न म ा ᇰ म न ः
	
।
न ा ᇰ य ु ि ᇫ छ ् र त ं
	
न ा ि त न ी च ं
	
च ै ल ा ि ज न क ु श ो ሧ र म ्
	
॥
१ १
॥
त त ् र ै क ा ग ् र ं
	
म न ः
	
क ृ ᇰ व ा
	
य त ि च ሧ े ि ᇳ द ् र य ि क ् र य ः
	
।
उ प ि व ᇽ य ा स न े
	
य ु ᇮ ᇬ य ा ሱ ो ग म ा ᇰ म ि व श ु ሬ य े
	
॥
१ २
॥
śucau	deśe	pratiṣṭhāpya
sthiram	āsanam	ātmanaḥ
nāty-ucchritaṁ	nātinīcaṁ
cailājina-kuśottaram
tatraikāgraṁ	manaḥ	kṛtvā
yata-cittendriya-kriyaḥ
upaviśyāsane	yuñjyād
yogam	ātma-viśuddhaye
śucau—
in	sanctified;	
deśe—
in	the	land;	
pratiṣṭhāpya—
placing;	
sthiram—
firm;	
āsanam—
seat;	
ātmanaḥ—
self-dependant;	
na—
not;	
ati—
too;	
ucchritam
—high;	
na
—nor;	
ati—
too;	
nīcam—
low;	
caila-ajna—
soft	cloth	and	deerskin;
kuśottaram-kuśa	
grass;	
tatra—
thereupon;	
ekāgram—
one	attention;	
manaḥ	
—
mind;	
kṛtvā—
doing	so;	
yata-citta—
controlling	the	mind;	
indriya—
senses;
kriyaḥ—
activities;	
upaviśya—
sitting	on;	
āsane—
on	the	seat;	
yuñjyāt—
execute;	
yogam
—yoga	practice;	
ātma
—heart;	
viśuddhaye—
for	clarifying.
TRANSLATION
To	practice	yoga,	one	should	go	to	a	secluded	place	and	should	lay
kuśa-grass	on	the	ground	and	then	cover	it	with	a	deerskin	and	a	soft
cloth.	The	seat	should	neither	be	too	high	nor	too	low	and	should	be
situated	in	a	sacred	place.	The	yogī	should	then	sit	on	it	very	firmly	andshould	practice	yoga	by	controlling	the	mind	and	the	senses,	purifying	the
heart	and	fixing	the	mind	on	one	point.
PURPORT
"Sacred	place"	refers	to	places	of	pilgrimage.	In	India	the	
yogīs,	
the
transcendentalists	or	the	devotees	all	leave	home	and	reside	in	sacred	places
such	as	Prayāg,	Mathurā,	Vṛndāvana,	Hṛṣīkeśa,	and	Hardwar	and	in	solitude
practice	
yoga	
where	the	sacred	rivers	like	the	Yamunā	and	the	Ganges	flow.
But	often	this	is	not	possible,	especially	for	Westerners.	The	so-called	
yoga
societies	in	big	cities	may	be	successful	in	earning	material	benefit,	but	they
are	not	at	all	suitable	for	the	actual	practice	of	
yoga.	
One	who	is	not	self-
controlled	and	whose	mind	is	not	undisturbed	cannot	practice	meditation.
Therefore,	in	the	
Bṛhan-Nāradīya	Purāṇa	
it	is	said	that	in	the	Kali-yuga	(the
present	
yuga	
or	age)	when	people	in	general	are	short-lived,	slow	in	spiritual
realization	and	always	disturbed	by	various	anxieties,	the	best	means	of
spiritual	realization	is	chanting	the	holy	name	of	the	Lord.
harer	nāma	harer	nāma	harer	nāmaiva	kevalam
kalau	nāsty	eva	nāsty	eva	nāsty	eva	gatir	anyathā.
"In	this	age	of	quarrel	and	hypocrisy	the	only	means	of	deliverance	is	chanting
the	holy	name	of	the	Lord.	There	is	no	other	way.	There	is	no	other	way.
There	is	no	other	way."
TEXTS	13-14
स म ं
	
क ा य ि श र ो ग ् र ी व ं
	
ध ा र य ᇳ न च ल ं
	
ि ᇿ थ र ः
	
।
स ᇸ प ् र े ቎ य
	
न ा ि स क ा ग ् र ं
	
ᇿ व ं
	
ि द श ᇽ च ा न व ल ो क य न ्
	
॥
१ ३
॥
प ् र श ा ᇳ त ा ᇰ म ा
	
ि व ग त भ ी ब ् र ᆼ ቊ च ा ि र व ् र त े
	
ि ᇿ थ त ः
	
।
म न ः
	
स ं य ᇸ य
	
म ि ᇫ च ሧ ो
	
य ु ᇧ त
	
आ स ी त
	
म ᇰ प र ः
	
॥
१ ४
॥
samaṁ	kāya-śiro-grīvaṁ
dhārayann	acalaṁ	sthiraḥ
samprekṣya	nāsikāgraṁ	svaṁ
diśaś	cānavalokayan
praśāntātmā	vigata-bhīr
brahmacāri-vrate	sthitaḥmanaḥ	saṁyamya	mac-citto
yukta	āsīta	mat-paraḥ
samam—
straight;	
kāya-śiraḥ—
body	and	head;	
grīvam—
neck;	
dhārayan—
holding;	
acalam—
unmoved;	
sthiraḥ—
still;	
samprekṣya—
looking;	
nāsikā—
nose;	
agram—
tip;	
svam—
own;	
diśaḥ—
all	sides;	
ca—
also;	
anavalokayan—
not
seeing;	
praśānta—
unagitated;	
ātmā—
mind;	
vigata-bhīḥ—
devoid	of	fear;
brahmacāri-vrate—
in	the	vow	of	celibacy;	
sthitaḥ—
situated;	
manaḥ—
mind;
saṁyamya—
completely	subdued;	
mat—
unto	Me	(Kṛṣṇa);	
cittaḥ
—
concentrated;	
yuktaḥ—
actual	
yogī
;	
āsīta—
being	so;	
mat—
unto	Me;	
paraḥ
—
ultimate	goal.
TRANSLATION
One	should	hold	one's	body,	neck	and	head	erect	in	a	straight	line	and
stare	steadily	at	the	tip	of	the	nose.	Thus	with	an	unagitated,	subdued
mind,	devoid	of	fear,	completely	free	from	sex	life,	one	should	meditate
upon	Me	within	the	heart	and	make	Me	the	ultimate	goal	of	life.
PURPORT
The	goal	of	life	is	to	know	Kṛṣṇa,	who	is	situated	within	the	heart	of	every
living	being	as	Paramātmā,	the	four-handed	Viṣṇu	form.	The	
yoga	
process	is
practiced	in	order	to	discover	and	see	this	localized	form	of	Viṣṇu,	and	not	for
any	other	purpose.	The	localized	Viṣṇu-mūrti	is	the	plenary	representation	of
Kṛṣṇa	dwelling	within	one's	heart.	One	who	has	no	program	to	realize	this
Viṣṇu-	murti	is	uselessly	engaged	in	mock-
yoga
	practice	and	is	certainly
wasting	his	time.	Kṛṣṇā	is	the	ultimate	goal	of	life,	and	the	Viṣṇu-murti
situated	in	one's	heart	is	the	object	of	
yoga
	practice.	To	realize	this	Viṣṇu-
murti	within	the	heart,	one	has	to	observe	complete	abstinence	from	sex	life;
therefore	one	has	to	leave	home	and	live	alone	in	a	secluded	place,	remaining
seated	as	mentioned	above.	One	cannot	enjoy	sex	life	daily	at	home	or
elsewhere	and	attend	a	so-called	
yoga
	class	and	thus	become	a	
yogī
.	One	has
to	practice	controlling	the	mind	and	avoiding	all	kinds	of	sense	gratification,
of	which	sex	life	is	the	chief.	In	the	rules	of	celibacy	written	by	the	great	sage
Yājñavalkya	it	is	said:karmaṇā	manasā	vācā	sarvāvasthāsu	sarvadā
sarvatra	maithuṇa-tyāgo	brahmacaryaṁ	pracakṣate.
"The	vow	of	
brahmacarya	
is	meant	to	help	one	completely	abstain	from	sex
indulgence	in	work,	words	and	mind—at	all	times,	under	all	circumstances,
and	in	all	places."	No	one	can	perform	correct	
yoga	
practice	through	sex
indulgence.	
Brahmacarya
	is	taught,	therefore,	from	childhood	when	one	has
no	knowledge	of	sex	life.	Children	at	the	age	of	five	are	sent	to	the	
guru-kula,
or	the	place	of	the	spiritual	master,	and	the	master	trains	the	young	boys	in	the
strict	discipline	of	becoming	
brahmacārīs.	
Without	such	practice,	no	one	can
make	advancement	in	any	
yoga,	
whether	it	be	
dhyāna,	jñāna	
or	
bhakti.	
One
who,	however,	follows	the	rules	and	regulations	of	married	life,	having	sexual
relationship	only	with	his	wife	(and	that	also	under	regulation),	is	also	called
brahmacārī.	
Such	a	restrained	householder	
brahmacārī	
may	be	accepted	in
the	
bhakti	
school,	but	the	
jñāna	
and	
dhyāna	
schools	do	not	admit	even
householder	
brahmacārīs.	
They	require	complete	abstinence	without
compromise.	In	the	
bhakti	
school,	a	householder	
brahmacārī
	is	allowed
controlled	sex	life	because	the	cult	of	
bhakti-yoga	
is	so	powerful	that	one
automatically	loses	sexual	attraction,	being	engaged	in	the	superior	service	of
the	Lord.	In	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
it	is	said:
viṣayā	vinivartante	nirāhārasya	dehinaḥ
rasa-varjaṁ	raso	'py	asya	paraṁ	dṛṣṭvā	nivartate
Whereas	others	are	forced	to	restrain	themselves	from	sense	gratification,	a
devotee	of	the	Lord	automatically	refrains	because	of	superior	taste.	Other
than	the	devotee,	no	one	has	any	information	of	that	superior	taste.
Vigatabhīḥ.	
One	cannot	be	fearless	unless	one	is	fully	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	A	conditioned	soul	is	fearful	due	to	his	perverted	memory,	his
forgetfulness	of	his	eternal	relationship	with	Kṛṣṇa.	The	
Bhāgavatam	
says,
bhayaṁ	dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ	syād	īśād	apetasya	viparyayo	'smṛtiḥ:	
Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	the	only	basis	for	fearlessness.	Therefore,	perfect	practice	is
possible	for	a	person	who	is	Kṛṣṇa	conscious.	And	since	the	ultimate	goal	of
yoga	
practice	is	to	see	the	Lord	within,	a	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	is	already
the	best	of	all	
yogīs.	
The	principles	of	the	
yoga	
system	mentioned	herein	are
different	from	those	of	the	popular	so-called	
yoga	
societies.TEXT	15
य ु ᇮ ज ᇳ न े व ं
	
स द ा ᇰ म ा न ं
	
य ो ग ी
	
ि न य त म ा न स ः
	
।
श ा ि ᇳ त ं
	
ि न व ा ᆼ ण प र म ा ं
	
म ᇰ स ं ᇿ थ ा म ि ध ग ᇫ छ ि त
	
॥
१ ५
॥
yuñjann	evaṁ	sadātmānaṁ
yogī	niyata-mānasaḥ
śāntiṁ	nirvāṇa-paramām
mat-saṁsthām	adhigacchati
yuñjan—
practicing	like	this;	
evam—
as	mentioned	above;	
sadā—
constantly;
ātmānam—
body,	mind	and	soul;	
yogī—
the	mystic	transcendentalist;	
niyata-
mānasaḥ—
regulated	mind;	
śāntim—
peace;	
nirvāṇa-paramām—
cessation	of
material	existence;	
mat-saṁsthām—
in	the	spiritual	sky	(the	kingdom	of	God);
adhigacchati—
does	attain.
TRANSLATION
Thus	practicing	control	of	the	body,	mind	and	activities,	the	mystic
transcendentalist	attains	to	the	kingdom	of	God	[or	the	abode	of	Kṛṣṇa]
by	cessation	of	material	existence.
PURPORT
The	ultimate	goal	in	practicing	
yoga	
is	now	clearly	explained.	
Yoga	
practice
is	not	meant	for	attaining	any	kind	of	material	facility;	it	is	to	enable	the
cessation	of	all	material	existence.	One	who	seeks	an	improvement	in	health
or	aspires	after	material	perfection	is	no	
yogī
	according	to	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
Nor
does	cessation	of	material	existence	entail	one's	entering	into	"the	void,"
which	is	only	a	myth.	There	is	no	void	anywhere	within	the	creation	of	the
Lord.	Rather,	the	cessation	of	material	existence	enables	one	to	enter	into	the
spiritual	sky,	the	abode	of	the	Lord.	The	abode	of	the	Lord	is	also	clearly
described	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
as	that	place	where	there	is	no	need	of	sun,
moon,	nor	electricity.	All	the	planets	in	the	spiritual	kingdom	are	self-
illuminated	like	the	sun	in	the	material	sky.	The	kingdom	of	God	is
everywhere,	but	the	spiritual	sky	and	the	planets	thereof	are	called	
paraṁdhāma,	
or	superior	abodes.
A	consummate	
yogī,	
who	is	perfect	in	understanding	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	as	is
clearly	stated	herein	
(mat-cittaḥ,	mat-paraḥ,	mat-sthānam)	
by	the	Lord
Himself,	can	attain	real	peace	and	can	ultimately	reach	His	supreme	abode,
the	Kṛṣṇa-loka	known	as	Goloka	Vṛndāvana.	In	the	
Brahma-saṁhitā	
it	is
clearly	stated	
(goloka	eva	nivasaty	akhilātma-	bhūtaḥ)	
that	the	Lord,	although
residing	always	in	His	abode	called	Goloka,	is	the	all-pervading	Brahman	and
the	localized	Paramātmā	as	well	by	dint	of	His	superior	spiritual	energies.	No
one	can	reach	the	spiritual	sky	or	enter	into	the	eternal	abode	(Vaikuṇṭha
Goloka	Vṛndāvana)	of	the	Lord	without	the	proper	understanding	of	Kṛṣṇa
and	His	plenary	expansion	Viṣṇu.	Therefore	a	person	working	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	the	perfect	
yogī
,	because	his	mind	is	always	absorbed	in
Kṛṣṇa's	activities.	
Sa	vai	manaḥ	kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ.	
In	the	
Vedas
	also	we
learn:	
tam	eva	viditvātimṛtyum	eti:
	"One	can	overcome	the	path	of	birth	and
death	only	by	understanding	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa."	In
other	words,	perfection	of	the	
yoga
	system	is	the	attainment	of	freedom	from
material	existence	and	not	some	magical	jugglery	or	gymnastic	feats	to	befool
innocent	people.
TEXT	16
न ा ᇰ य ᇽ न त ᇿ त ु
	
य ो ग ो ऽ ि ᇿ त
	
न
	
च ै क ा ᇳ त म न ᇽ न त ः
	
।
न
	
च ा ि त ᇿ व ᇴ न श ी ल ᇿ य
	
ज ा ग ् र त ो
	
न ै व
	
च ा ज ु ᆼ न
	
॥
१ ६
॥
nātyaśnatas	tu	yogo	'sti
na	caikāntam	anaśnataḥ
na	cāti-svapna-śīlasya
jāgrato	naiva	cārjuna
na—
never;	
ati—
too	much;	
aśnataḥ—
of	one	who	eats	so;	
tu—
but;	
yogaḥ—
linking	with	the	Supreme;	
asti—
there	is;	
na—
nor;	
ca—
also;	
ekāntam—
very
low;	
anaśnataḥ—
abstaining	from	eating;	
na—
nor;	
ca—
also;	
ati—
too	much;
svapna-śīlasya—
of	one	who	sleeps	too	much;	
jāgrataḥ—
or	one	who	keeps
night	watch	too	much;	
na—
not;	
eva—
ever;	
ca—
and;	
arjuna—
O	Arjuna.
TRANSLATIONThere	is	no	possibility	of	one's	becoming	a	yogī,	O	Arjuna,	if	one	eats
too	much,	or	eats	too	little,	sleeps	too	much	or	does	not	sleep	enough.
PURPORT
Regulation	of	diet	and	sleep	is	recommended	herein	for	the	
yogīs.
	Too
much	eating	means	eating	more	than	is	required	to	keep	the	body	and	soul
together.	There	is	no	need	for	men	to	eat	animals	because	there	is	an	ample
supply	of	grains,	vegetables,	fruits	and	milk.	Such	simple	foodstuff	is
considered	to	be	in	the	mode	of	goodness	according	to	the	
Bhagavad-	gītā
.
Animal	food	is	for	those	in	the	mode	of	ignorance.	Therefore,	those	who
indulge	in	animal	food,	drinking,	smoking	and	eating	food	which	is	not	first
offered	to	Kṛṣṇa	will	suffer	sinful	reactions	because	of	eating	only	polluted
things.	
Bhuñjate	te	tv	aghaṁ	papa	ye	pacanty	ātma-kāraṇāt.	
Anyone	who	eats
for	sense	pleasure,	or	cooks	for	himself,	not	offering	his	food	to	Kṛṣṇa,	eats
only	sin.	One	who	eats	sin	and	eats	more	than	is	allotted	to	him	cannot
execute	perfect	
yoga.	
It	is	best	that	one	eat	only	the	remnants	of	foodstuff
offered	to	Kṛṣṇa.	A	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	does	not	eat	anything
which	is	not	first	offered	to	Kṛṣṇa.	Therefore,	only	the	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person
can	attain	perfection	in
	yoga	
practice.	Nor	can	one	who	artificially	abstains
from	eating,	manufacturing	his	own	personal	process	of	fasting,	practice	
yoga.
The	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	observes	fasting	as	it	is	recommended	in	the
scriptures.	He	does	not	fast	or	eat	more	than	is	required,	and	he	is	thus
competent	to	perform	
yoga	
practice.	One	who	eats	more	than	required	will
dream	very	much	while	sleeping,	and	he	must	consequently	sleep	more	than	is
required.	One	should	not	sleep	more	than	six	hours	daily.	One	who	sleeps
more	than	six	hours	out	of	twenty-four	is	certainly	influenced	by	the	mode	of
ignorance.	A	person	in	the	mode	of	ignorance	is	lazy	and	prone	to	sleep	a
great	deal.	Such	a	person	cannot	perform	
yoga.
TEXT	17
य ु ᇧ त ा ह ा र ि व ह ा र ᇿ य
	
य ु ᇧ त च े ᇾ ट ᇿ य
	
क म ᆼ स ु
	
।
य ु ᇧ त ᇿ व ᇴ न ा व ब ो ध ᇿ य
	
य ो ग ो
	
भ व ि त
	
द ु ः ख ह ा
	
॥
१ ७
॥
yuktāhāra-vihārasya
yukta-ceṣṭasya	karmasuyukta-svapnāvabodhasya
yogo	bhavati	duḥkha-hā
yukta—
regulated;	
āhāra—
eating;	
vihārasya—
recreation;	
yukta—
regulated;
ceṣṭasya—
of	one	who	works	for	maintenance;	
karmasu—
in	discharging
duties;	
yukta—
regulated;	
svapna-avabodhasya—
regulated	sleep	and
wakefulness;	
yogaḥ—
practice	of	
yoga;	bhavati—
becomes;	
duḥkha-hā
—
diminishing	pains.
TRANSLATION
He	who	is	temperate	in	his	habits	of	eating,	sleeping,	working	and
recreation	can	mitigate	all	material	pains	by	practicing	the	yoga	system.
PURPORT
Extravagance	in	the	matter	of	eating,	sleeping,	defending	and	mating
—
which	are	demands	of	the	body—can	block	advancement	in	the	practice	of
yoga.	
As	far	as	eating	is	concerned,	it	can	be	regulated	only	when	one	is
practiced	to	take	and	accept	
prasādam,	
sanctified	food.	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	offered,
according	to	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
(Bg.	9.26),	vegetables,	flowers,	fruits,	grains,
milk,	etc.	In	this	way,	a	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	becomes	automatically
trained	not	to	accept	food	not	meant	for	human	consumption,	or	which	is	not
in	the	category	of	goodness.	As	far	as	sleeping	is	concerned,	a	Kṛṣṇa
conscious	person	is	always	alert	in	the	discharge	of	his	duties	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	and	therefore	any	unnecessary	time	spent	sleeping	is
considered	a	great	loss.	A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	cannot	bear	to	pass	a
minute	of	his	life	without	being	engaged	in	the	service	of	the	Lord.	Therefore,
his	sleeping	is	kept	to	a	minimum.	His	ideal	in	this	respect	is	Śrīla	Rūpa
Gosvāmī,	who	was	always	engaged	in	the	service	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	who	could	not
sleep	more	than	two	hours	a	day,	and	sometimes	not	even	that.	Ṭhākura
Haridāsa	would	not	even	accept	
prasādam	
nor	even	sleep	for	a	moment
without	finishing	his	daily	routine	of	chanting	with	his	beads	three	hundred
thousand	names.	As	far	as	work	is	concerned,	a	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	does
not	do	anything	which	is	not	connected	with	Kṛṣṇa's	interest,	and	thus	his
work	is	always	regulated	and	is	untainted	by	sense	gratification.	Since	there	is
no	question	of	sense	gratification,	there	is	no	material	leisure	for	a	person	inKṛṣṇa	consciousness.	And	because	he	is	regulated	in	all	his	work,	speech,
sleep,	wakefulness	and	all	other	bodily	activities,	there	is	no	material	misery
for	him.
TEXT	18
य द ा
	
ि व ि न य त ं
	
ि च ሧ म ा ᇰ म ᇳ य े व ा व ि त ᇾ ठ त े
	
।
ि न ᇿ प ृ ह ः
	
स व ᆼ क ा म े ᇷ य ो
	
य ु ᇧ त
	
इ ᇰ य ु ᇫ य त े
	
त द ा
	
॥
१ ८
॥
yadā	viniyataṁ	cittam
ātmany	evāvatiṣṭhate
nispṛhaḥ	sarva-kāmebhyo
yukta	ity	ucyate	tadā
yadā—
when;	
viniyatam—
particularly	disciplined;	
cittam—
the	mind	and	its
activities;	
ātmani—
in	the	Transcendence;	
eva—
certainly;	
avatiṣṭhate—
becomes	situated;	
nispṛhaḥ—
devoid	of;	
sarva—
all	kinds	of;	
kāmebhyaḥ—
material	desires;	
yuktaḥ—
well	situated	in	
yoga;	iti—
thus;	
ucyate—
is	said	to
be;	
tadā—
at	that	time.
TRANSLATION
When	the	yogī,	by	practice	of	yoga,	disciplines	his	mental	activities	and
becomes	situated	in	Transcendence—devoid	of	all	material	desires—he	is
said	to	have	attained	yoga.
PURPORT
The	activities	of	the	
yogī
	are	distinguished	from	those	of	an	ordinary	person
by	his	characteristic	cessation	from	all	kinds	of	material	desires—of	which	sex
is	the	chief.	A	perfect	
yogī
	is	so	well	disciplined	in	the	activities	of	the	mind
that	he	can	no	longer	be	disturbed	by	any	kind	of	material	desire.	This
perfectional	stage	can	automatically	be	attained	by	persons	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	as	is	stated	in	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
(9.4.18-20):
sa	vai	manaḥ	kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor	vacāṁsi	vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇanekarau	harer	mandira-mārjanādiṣu	śrutiṁ	cakārācyuta-sat-kathodaye
mukunda-liṅgālaya-darśane	dṛśau	tad-bhṛtyagātra-sparśe	'ṅga-
saṅgamam
ghrāṇaṁ	ca	tat-pāda-saroja-saurabhe	śrīmat	tulasyā	rasanāṁ	tad-
arpite
pādau	hareḥ	kṣetra-padānusarpaṇe	śiro	hṛṣīkeśa-padābhivandane
kāmaṁ	ca	dāsye	na	tu	kāma-kāmyayā	yathottama-śloka-janāśrayā
ratiḥ
"King	Ambarīṣa	first	of	all	engaged	his	mind	on	the	lotus	feet	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa;
then,	one	after	another,	he	engaged	his	words	in	describing	the	transcendental
qualities	of	the	Lord,	his	hands	in	mopping	the	temple	of	the	Lord,	his	ears	in
hearing	of	the	activities	of	the	Lord,	his	eyes	in	seeing	the	transcendental
forms	of	the	Lord,	his	body	in	touching	the	bodies	of	the	devotees,	his	sense
of	smell	in	smelling	the	scents	of	the	lotus	flower	offered	to	the	Lord,	his
tongue	in	tasting	the	
tulasī
	leaf	offered	at	the	lotus	feet	of	the	Lord,	his	legs	in
going	to	places	of	pilgrimage	and	the	temple	of	the	Lord,	his	head	in	offering
obeisances	unto	the	Lord	and	his	desires	in	executing	the	mission	of	the	Lord.
All	these	transcendental	activities	are	quite	befitting	a	pure	devotee."
This	transcendental	stage	may	be	inexpressible	subjectively	by	the
followers	of	the	impersonalist	path,	but	it	becomes	very	easy	and	practical	for
a	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	as	is	apparent	in	the	above	description	of	the
engagements	of	Mahārāja	Ambarīṣa.	Unless	the	mind	is	fixed	on	the	lotus	feet
of	the	Lord	by	constant	remembrance,	such	transcendental	engagements	are
not	practical.	In	the	devotional	service	of	the	Lord,	therefore,	these	prescribed
activities	are	called	
arcanā
,	or	engaging	all	the	senses	in	the	service	of	the
Lord.	The	senses	and	the	mind	require	engagements.	Simple	abnegation	is	not
practical.	Therefore,	for	people	in	general
—
especially	those	who	are	not	in	the
renounced	order	of	life
—	
transcendental	engagement	of	the	senses	and	the
mind	as	described	above	is	the	perfect	process	for	transcendental	achievement,
which	is	called	
yukta
	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā.
TEXT	19
य थ ा
	
द ी प ो
	
ि न व ा त ᇿ थ ो
	
न े ङ ् ग त े
	
स ो प म ा
	
ᇿ म ृ त ा
	
।
य ो ि ग न ो
	
य त ि च ሧ ᇿ य
	
य ु ᇮ ज त ो
	
य ो ग म ा ᇰ म न ः
	
॥
१ ९
॥yathā	dīpo	nivātastho
neṅgate	sopamā	smṛtā
yogino	yata-cittasya
yuñjato	yogam	ātmanaḥ
yathā
—as;	
dīpaḥ—
a	lamp;	
nivātasthaḥ
—in	a	place	without	wind;	
na
—does
not;	
iṅgate
—waver;	
sā	upamā
—compared	to	that;	
smṛtā
—likened;	
yoginaḥ
—
of	the	
yogī
;	
yata-cittasya
—whose	mind	is	controlled;	
yuñjataḥ
—constantly
engaged	in;	
yogam
—meditation;	
ātmanaḥ
—on	Transcendence.
TRANSLATION
As	a	lamp	in	a	windless	place	does	not	waver,	so	the	transcendentalist,
whose	mind	is	controlled,	remains	always	steady	in	his	meditation	on	the
transcendent	Self.
PURPORT
A	truly	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person,	always	absorbed	in	Transcendence,	in
constant	undisturbed	meditation	on	his	worshipable	Lord,	is	as	steady	as	a
lamp	in	a	windless	place.
TEXTS	20-23
य त ् र ो प र म त े
	
ि च ሧ ं
	
ि न ኄ ሬ ं
	
य ो ग स े व य ा
	
।
य त ् र
	
च ै व ा ᇰ म न ा ᇰ म ा न ं
	
प ᇽ य ᇳ न ा ᇰ म ि न
	
त ु ᇾ य ि त
	
॥
२ ०
॥
स ु ख म ा ᇰ य ि ᇳ त क ं
	
य ሧ द ्
	
ब ु द ् ि ध ग ् र ा ቋ म त ी ि ᇳ द ् र य म ्
	
।
व े ि ሧ
	
य त ् र
	
न
	
च ै व ा य ं
	
ि ᇿ थ त ᇽ च ल ि त
	
त ᇰ ᇰ व त ः
	
॥
२ १
॥
य ं
	
ल ᇶ ᇲ व ा
	
च ा प र ं
	
ल ा भ ं
	
म ᇳ य त े
	
न ा ि ध क ं
	
त त ः
	
।
य ि ᇿ म ि ᇳ ᇿ थ त ो
	
न
	
द ु ः ख े न
	
ग ु ኄ ण ा ि प
	
ि व च ा ᇺ य त े
	
॥
२ २
॥
त ं
	
ि व ሱ ा ራ ु ः ख स ं य ो ग ि व य ो ग ं
	
य ो ग स ं ि ᇥ त म ्
	
॥
२ ३
॥
yatroparamate	cittaṁ
niruddhaṁ	yoga-sevayā
yatra	caivātmanātmānaṁ
paśyann	ātmani	tuṣyatisukham	ātyantikaṁ	yat	tad
buddhi-grāhyam	atīndriyam
vetti	yatra	na	caivāyaṁ
sthitaś	calati	tattvataḥ
yaṁ	labdhvā	cāparaṁ	lābhaṁ
manyate	nādhikaṁ	tataḥ
yasmin	sthito	na	duḥkhena
guruṇāpi	vicālyate
taṁ	vidyād	duḥkha-saṁyoga-
viyogaṁ	yoga-saṁjñitam
yatra—
in	that	state	of	affairs;	
uparamate—
when	one	feels	transcendental
happiness;	
cittam—
mental	activities;	
niruddham—
restrained	from	matter;
yoga-sevayā—
by	performance	of	
yoga;	yatra—
in	that;	
ca—
also;	
eva
—
certainly;	
ātmanā—
by	the	pure	mind;	
ātmānam—
self;	
paśyan—
realizing	the
position;	
ātmani—
in	the	self;	
tuṣyati—
becomes	satisfied;	
sukham—
happiness;
ātyantikam—
supreme;	
yat—
in	which;	
tat—
that;	
buddhi—
intelligence;
grāhyam—
acceptable;	
atīndriyam—
transcendental;	
vetti—
knows;	
yatra—
wherein;	
na—
never;	
ca—
also;	
eva
—certainly;	
ayam
—in	this;	
sthitaḥ
—
situated;	
calati—
moves;	
tattvataḥ—
from	the	truth;	
yam—
that	which;
labdhvā—
by	attainment;	
ca—
also;	
aparam—
any	other;	
lābham—
gain;
manyate—
does	not	mind;	
na—
never;	
adhikam—
more	than	that;	
tataḥ—
from
that;	
yasmin—
in	which;	
sthitaḥ—
being	situated;	
na—
never;	
duḥkhena—
by
miseries;	
guruṇāpi	
—even	though	very	difficult;	
vicālyate—
becomes	shaken;
tam—
that;	
vidyāt	
—you	must	know;	
duḥkha-saṁyoga—
miseries	of	material
contact;	
viyogam	
—extermination;	
yoga-samjñitam—
trance	in	
yoga.
TRANSLATION
The	stage	of	perfection	is	called	trance,	or	samādhi,	when	one's	mind	is
completely	restrained	from	material	mental	activities	by	practice	of	yoga.
This	is	characterized	by	one's	ability	to	see	the	self	by	the	pure	mind	and
to	relish	and	rejoice	in	the	self.	In	that	joyous	state,	one	is	situated	in
boundless	transcendental	happiness	and	enjoys	himself	through
transcendental	senses.	Established	thus,	one	never	departs	from	the	truth,
and	upon	gaining	this	he	thinks	there	is	no	greater	gain.	Being	situated	in
such	a	position,	one	is	never	shaken,	even	in	the	midst	of	greatestdifficulty.	This	indeed	is	actual	freedom	from	all	miseries	arising	from
material	contact.
PURPORT
By	practice	of	
yoga	
one	becomes	gradually	detached	from	material
concepts.	This	is	the	primary	characteristic	of	the	
yoga	
principle.	And	after
this,	one	becomes	situated	in	trance,	or	
samādhi	
which	means	that	the	
yogī
realizes	the	Supersoul	through	transcendental	mind	and	intelligence,	without
any	of	the	misgivings	of	identifying	the	self	with	the	Superself.	
Yoga	
practice
is	more	or	less	based	on	the	principles	of	the	Patañjali	system.	Some
unauthorized	commentators	try	to	identify	the	individual	soul	with	the
Supersoul,	and	the	monists	think	this	to	be	liberation,	but	they	do	not
understand	the	real	purpose	of	the	Patañjali	system	of	
yoga.	
There	is	an
acceptance	of	transcendental	pleasure	in	the	Patañjali	system,	but	the	monists
do	not	accept	this	transcendental	pleasure	out	of	fear	of	jeopardizing	the
theory	of	oneness.	The	duality	of	knowledge	and	knower	is	not	accepted	by
the	nondualist,	but	in	this	verse	transcendental	pleasure—realized	through
transcendental	senses—is	accepted.	And	this	is	corroborated	by	the	Patañjali
Muni,	the	famous	exponent	of	the	
yoga	
system.	The	great	sage	declares	in	his
Yoga-sūtras:	puruṣārtha—śūnyānāṁ	guṇānāṁ	pratiprasavaḥ	kaivalyaṁ
svarūpa-pratiṣṭhā	vā	citi-śaktir	iti.
This	
citi-śakti,	
or	internal	potency,	is	transcendental.	
Puruṣārtha	
means
material	religiosity,	economic	development,	sense	gratification	and,	at	the	end,
the	attempt	to	become	one	with	the	Supreme.	This	"oneness	with	the
Supreme"	is	called	
kaivalyam	
by	the	monist.	But	according	to	Patañjali,	this
kaivalyam
	is	an	internal,	or	transcendental,	potency	by	which	the	living	entity
becomes	aware	of	his	constitutional	position.	In	the	words	of	Lord	Caitanya,
this	state	of	affairs	is	called	
ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam
,	or	clearance	of	the
impure	mirror	of	the	mind.	This	"clearance"	is	actually	liberation,	or	
bhava-
mahādāvāgni-nirvāpaṇam.	
The	theory	of	
nirvāṇa—
also	preliminary
—
corresponds	with	this	principle.	In	the	
Bhāgavatam	
this	is	called	
svarūpeṇa
vyavasthitiḥ.	
The	
Bhagavad-gītā	
also	confirms	this	situation	in	this	verse.
After	
nirvāṇa,	
or	material	cessation,	there	is	the	manifestation	of	spiritual
activities,	or	devotional	service	of	the	Lord,	known	as	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	In
the	words	of	the	
Bhāgavatam,	svarūpeṇa	vyavasthitiḥ:	
this	is	the	"real	life	of
the	living	entity."	
Māyā
,	or	illusion,	is	the	condition	of	spiritual	lifecontaminated	by	material	infection.	Liberation	from	this	material	infection
does	not	mean	destruction	of	the	original	eternal	position	of	the	living	entity.
Patañjali	also	accepts	this	by	his	words	
kaivalyam	svarūpa-pratiṣṭhā	vā	citi-
śaktir	iti.	
This	
citi-śakti	
or	transcendental	pleasure,	is	real	life.	This	is
confirmed	in	the	
Vedānta-sūtras	
as	
ānandamayo	'bhyāsāt.	
This	natural
transcendental	pleasure	is	the	ultimate	goal	of	
yoga	
and	is	easily	achieved	by
execution	of	devotional	service,	or	
bhakti-yoga.	Bhaktiyoga	
will	be	vividly
described	in	the	Seventh	Chapter	of	
Bhagavad-gītā.
In	the	
yoga	
system,	as	described	in	this	chapter,	there	are	two	kinds	of
samādhi,	
called	
samprajñāta-samādhi	
and	
asamprajñāta-samādhi.	
When	one
becomes	situated	in	the	transcendental	position	by	various	philosophical
researches,	it	is	called	
samprajñāta-samādhi.	
In	the	
asamprajñāta-samādhi
there	is	no	longer	any	connection	with	mundane	pleasure,	for	one	is	then
transcendental	to	all	sorts	of	happiness	derived	from	the	senses.	When	the	
yogī
is	once	situated	in	that	transcendental	position,	he	is	never	shaken	from	it.
Unless	the	
yogī
	is	able	to	reach	this	position,	he	is	unsuccessful.	Today's	so-
called	
yoga	
practice,	which	involves	various	sense	pleasures,	is	contradictory.
A	
yogī
	indulging	in	sex	and	intoxication	is	a	mockery.	Even	those	
yogīs	
who
are	attracted	by	the	
siddhis	
(perfections)	in	the	process	of	
yoga	
are	not
perfectly	situated.	If	the	
yogīs	
are	attracted	by	the	by-products	of	
yoga,	
then
they	cannot	attain	the	stage	of	perfection,	as	is	stated	in	this	verse.	Persons,
therefore,	indulging	in	the	make-show	practice	of	gymnastic	feats	or	
siddhis
should	know	that	the	aim	of	
yoga
	is	lost	in	that	way.
The	best	practice	of	
yoga	
in	this	age	is	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	which	is	not
baffling.	A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	is	so	happy	in	his	occupation	that	he	does
not	aspire	after	any	other	happiness.	There	are	many	impediments,	especially
in	this	age	of	hypocrisy,	to	practicing	
haṭha-	yoga,	dhyāna-yoga,	
and	
jñāna-
yoga,	
but	there	is	no	such	problem	in	executing	
karma-yoga	
or	
bhakti-yoga.
As	long	as	the	material	body	exists,	one	has	to	meet	the	demands	of	the
body,	namely	eating,	sleeping,	defending	and	mating.	But	a	person	who	is	in
pure	
bhakti-yoga	
or	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	does	not	arouse	the	senses	while
meeting	the	demands	of	the	body.	Rather,	he	accepts	the	bare	necessities	of
life,	making	the	best	use	of	a	bad	bargain,	and	enjoys	transcendental	happiness
in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	He	is	callous	toward	incidental	occurrences—such	as
accidents,	disease,	scarcity	and	even	the	death	of	a	most	dear	relative—but	he
is	always	alert	to	execute	his	duties	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	or	
bhakti-yoga.
Accidents	never	deviate	him	from	his	duty.	As	stated	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā,
āgamāpāyino	'nityās	tāṁs	titikṣasva	bhārata.	
He	endures	all	such	incidentaloccurences	because	he	knows	that	they	come	and	go	and	do	not	affect	his
duties.	In	this	way	he	achieves	the	highest	perfection	in	
yoga	
practice.
TEXT	24
स
	
ि न ᇽ च य े न
	
य ो ᇧ त ᇼ य ो
	
य ो ग ो ऽ ि न ि व ᆼ ᇯ ण च े त स ा
	
।
स ङ ् क ᇺ प प ् र भ व ा ᇳ क ा म ा ं ᇿ ᇰ य ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
स व ा ᆼ न श े ष त ः
	
।
म न स ै व े ि ᇳ द ् र य ग ् र ा म ं
	
ि व ि न य ᇸ य
	
स म ᇳ त त ः
	
॥
२ ४
॥
sa	niścayena	yoktavyo
yogo	'nirviṇṇa-cetasā
saṅkalpa-prabhavān	kāmāṁs
tyaktvā	sarvān	aśeṣataḥ
manasaivendriya-grāmaṁ
viniyamya	samantataḥ
saḥ—
that	
yoga	
system;	
niścayena—
with	firm	determination;	
yoktavyaḥ
—
must	be	practiced;	
yogaḥ—
in	such	practice;	
anirviṇṇa-cetasā—
without
deviation;	
saṅkalpa—
material	desires;	
prabhavān—
born	of;	
kāmān—
sense
gratification;	
tyaktvā—
giving	up;	
sarvān—
all;	
aśeṣatah
—completely;	
manasā
—by	the	mind;	
eva—
certainly;	
indriya-grāmam—
the	full	set	of	senses;
viniyamya—
regulating;	
samantataḥ—
from	all	sides.
TRANSLATION
One	should	engage	oneself	in	the	practice	of	yoga	with	undeviating
determination	and	faith.	One	should	abandon,	without	exception,	all
material	desires	born	of	false	ego	and	thus	control	all	the	senses	on	all
sides	by	the	mind.
PURPORT
The	
yoga	
practitioner	should	be	determined	and	should	patiently	prosecute
the	practice	without	deviation.	One	should	be	sure	of	success	at	the	end	and
pursue	this	course	with	great	perserverance,	not	becoming	discouraged	if	there
is	any	delay	in	the	attainment	of	success.	Success	is	sure	for	the	rigidpractitioner.	Regarding	
bhakti-yoga,	
Rupa	Gosvāmī	says:
utsāhān	niścayād	dhairyāt	tat	tat	karma-pravartanāt
saṅga-tyāgāt	satovṛtteḥ	ṣaḍbhir	bhaktiḥ	prasidhyati
"The	process	of	
bhakti-yoga	
can	be	executed	successfully	with	full-hearted
enthusiasm,	perseverance,	and	determination	by	following	the	prescribed
duties	in	the	association	of	devotees	and	by	engaging	completely	in	activities
of	goodness."
As	for	determination,	one	should	follow	the	example	of	the	sparrow	who
lost	her	eggs	in	the	waves	of	the	ocean.	A	sparrow	laid	her	eggs	on	the	shore
of	the	ocean,	but	the	big	ocean	carried	away	the	eggs	on	its	waves.	The
sparrow	became	very	upset	and	asked	the	ocean	to	return	her	eggs.	The	ocean
did	not	even	consider	her	appeal.	So	the	sparrow	decided	to	dry	up	the	ocean.
She	began	to	pick	out	the	water	in	her	small	beak,	and	everyone	laughed	at	her
for	her	impossible	determination.	The	news	of	her	activity	spread,	and	at	last
Garuḍa,	the	gigantic	bird	carrier	of	Lord	Viṣṇu,	heard	it.	He	became
compassionate	toward	his	small	sister	bird,	and	so	he	came	to	see	the	sparrow.
Garuḍa	was	very	pleased	by	the	determination	of	the	small	sparrow,	and	he
promised	to	help.	Thus	Garuḍa	at	once	asked	the	ocean	to	return	her	eggs	lest
he	himself	take	up	the	work	of	the	sparrow.	The	ocean	was	frightened	at	this,
and	returned	the	eggs.	Thus	the	sparrow	became	happy	by	the	grace	of
Garuḍa.
Similarly,	the	practice	of	
yoga,	
especially	
bhakti-yoga	
in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	may	appear	to	be	a	very	difficult	job.	But	if	anyone	follows	the
principles	with	great	determination,	the	Lord	will	surely	help,	for	God	helps
those	who	help	themselves.
TEXT	25
श न ै ः
	
श न ै ኄ प र म े ሮ ु ሬ ᆸ ा
	
ध ृ ि त ग ृ ह ी त य ा
	
।
आ ᇰ म स ं ᇿ थ ं
	
म न ः
	
क ृ ᇰ व ा
	
न
	
ि क ि ᇮ च द ि प
	
ि च ᇳ त य े त ्
	
॥
२ ५
॥
śanaiḥ	śanair	uparamed
buddhyā	dhṛti-gṛhītayā
ātma-saṁsthaṁ	manaḥ	kṛtvā
na	kiñcid	api	cintayetśanaiḥ—
gradually;	
śanaiḥ—
step	by	step;	
uparamet
—hesitated;	
buddhyā
—
by	intelligence;	
dhṛti-gṛhītayā—
carrying	the	conviction;	
ātma-saṁstham
—
placed	in	transcendence;	
manaḥ
—mind;	
kṛtvā
—doing	so;	
na
—nothing;	
kiñcit
—anything	else;	
api
—even;	
cintayet
—be	thinking	of.
TRANSLATION
Gradually,	step	by	step,	with	full	conviction,	one	should	become
situated	in	trance	by	means	of	intelligence,	and	thus	the	mind	should	be
fixed	on	the	Self	alone	and	should	think	of	nothing	else.
PURPORT
By	proper	conviction	and	intelligence	one	should	gradually	cease	sense
activities.	This	is	called	
pratyāhāra.	
The	mind,	being	controlled	by
conviction,	meditation,	and	cessation	of	the	senses,	should	be	situated	in
trance,	or	
samādhi.	
At	that	time	there	is	no	longer	any	danger	of	becoming
engaged	in	the	material	conception	of	life.	In	other	words,	although	one	is
involved	with	matter	as	long	as	the	material	body	exists,	one	should	not	think
about	sense	gratification.	One	should	think	of	no	pleasure	aside	from	the
pleasure	of	the	Supreme	Self.	This	state	is	easily	attained	by	directly
practicing	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
TEXT	26
य त ो
	
य त ो
	
ि न ᇽ च र ि त
	
म न ᇽ च ᇮ च ल म ि ᇿ थ र म ्
	
।
त त ᇿ त त ो
	
ि न य ᇸ य ै त द ा ᇰ म ᇳ य े व
	
व श ं
	
न य े त ्
	
॥
२ ६
॥
yato	yato	niścalati
manaś	cañcalam	asthiram
tatas	tato	niyamyaitad
ātmany	eva	vaśaṁ	nayet
yataḥ
—whatever;	
yataḥ
—wherever;	
niścalati
—verily	agitated;	
manaḥ
—
the	mind;	
cañcalam
—flickering;	
asthiram
—unsteady;	
tataḥ
—from	there;
tataḥ
—	and	thereafter;	
niyamya—
regulating;	
etat—
this;	
ātmani—
in	the	self;eva—	
certainly;	
vaśam—
control;	
nayet—
must	bring	in.
TRANSLATION
From	whatever	and	wherever	the	mind	wanders	due	to	its	flickering
and	unsteady	nature,	one	must	certainly	withdraw	it	and	bring	it	back
under	the	control	of	the	Self.
PURPORT
The	nature	of	the	mind	is	flickering	and	unsteady.	But	a	self-realized	
yogī
has	to	control	the	mind;	the	mind	should	not	control	him.	One	who	controls
the	mind	(and	therefore	the	senses	as	well)	is	called	
gosvāmī,	
or	
svāmī,	
and
one	who	is	controlled	by	the	mind	is	called	
godāsa,	
or	the	servant	of	the
senses.	A	
gosvāmī	
knows	the	standard	of	sense	happiness.	In	transcendental
sense	happiness,	the	senses	are	engaged	in	the	service	of	Hṛṣīkeśa	or	the
supreme	owner	of	the	senses—Kṛṣṇa.	Serving	Kṛṣṇa	with	purified	senses	is
called	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	That	is	the	way	of	bringing	the	senses	under	full
control.	What	is	more,	that	is	the	highest	perfection	of	
yoga	
practice.
TEXT	27
प ् र श ा ᇳ त म न स ं
	
ቋ े न ं
	
य ो ि ग न ं
	
स ु ख म ु ሧ म म ्
	
।
उ प ै ि त
	
श ा ᇳ त र ज स ं
	
ब ् र ቊ भ ू त म क ᇺ म ष म ्
	
॥
२ ७
॥
praśānta-manasaṁ	hy	enaṁ
yoginaṁ	sukham	uttamam
upaiti	śānta-rajasaṁ
brahma-bhūtam	akalmaṣam
praśānta—
mind	fixed	on	the	lotus	feet	of	Kṛṣṇa;	
manasam—
of	one	whose
mind	is	so	fixed;	
hi—
certainly;	
enam—
this;	
yoginam—
the	
yogī
;	
sukham
—
happiness;	
uttamam—
the	highest;	
upaiti—
attains;	
śānta-rajasam—
pacified
passion;	
brahma-bhūtam—
liberated	by	identification	with	the	Absolute;
akalmaṣam—
freed	from	all	past	sinful	reaction.TRANSLATION
The	yogī	whose	mind	is	fixed	on	Me	verily	attains	the	highest
happiness.	By	virtue	of	his	identity	with	Brahman,	he	is	liberated;	his
mind	is	peaceful,	his	passions	are	quieted,	and	he	is	freed	from	sin.
PURPORT
Brahma-bhūta
	is	the	state	of	being	free	from	material	contamination	and
situated	in	the	transcendental	service	of	the	Lord.	
Mad-bhaktim	labhate	parām
(Bg.	18.54).	One	cannot	remain	in	the	quality	of	Brahman,	the	Absolute,	until
one's	mind	is	fixed	on	the	lotus	feet	of	the	Lord.	
Sa	vai	manaḥ	kṛṣṇa-
padāravindayoḥ.	
To	be	always	engaged	in	the	transcendental	loving	service	of
the	Lord,	or	to	remain	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	is	to	be	factually	liberated	from
the	mode	of	passion	and	all	material	contamination.
TEXT	28
य ु ᇮ ज ᇳ न े व ं
	
स द ा ᇰ म ा न ं
	
य ो ग ी
	
ि व ग त क ᇺ म ष ः
	
।
स ु ख े न
	
ब ् र ቊ स ं ᇿ प श ᆼ म ᇰ य ᇳ त ं
	
स ु ख म ᇽ न ु त े
	
॥
२ ८
॥
yuñjann	evaṁ	sadātmānaṁ
yogī	vigata-kalmaṣaḥ
sukhena	brahma-saṁsparśam
atyantaṁ	sukham	aśnute
yuñjan—
thus	being	engaged	in	
yoga	
practice;	
evam—
thus;	
sadā—
always;
ātmānam—
self;	
yogī
—one	who	is	in	touch	with	the	Supreme	Self;	
vigata—
is
freed	from;	
kalmaṣaḥ—
all	material	contamination;	
sukhena—
in	transcendental
happiness;	
brahma-saṁsparśam—
being	in	constant	touch	with	the	Supreme;
atyantam—
highest;	
sukham—
happiness;	
aśnute—
attains.
TRANSLATIONSteady	in	the	Self,	being	freed	from	all	material	contamination,	the	yogī
achieves	the	highest	perfectional	stage	of	happiness	in	touch	with	the
Supreme	Consciousness.
PURPORT
Self-realization	means	knowing	one's	constitutional	position	in	relationship
to	the	Supreme.	The	individual	soul	is	part	and	parcel	of	the	Supreme,	and	his
position	is	to	render	transcendental	service	to	the	Lord.	This	transcendental
contact	with	the	Supreme	is	called	
brahma-saṁsparśa.
TEXT	29
स व ᆼ भ ू त ᇿ थ म ा ᇰ म ा न ं
	
स व ᆼ भ ू त ा ि न
	
च ा ᇰ म ि न
	
।
ई ᇤ त े
	
य ो ग य ु ᇧ त ा ᇰ म ा
	
स व ᆼ त ् र
	
स म द श ᆼ न ः
	
॥
२ ९
॥
sarva-bhūta-stham	ātmānaṁ
sarva-bhūtāni	cātmani
īkṣate	yoga-yukta-ātmā
sarvatra	sama-darśanaḥ
sarva-bhūta-stham—
situated	in	all	beings;	
ātmānam—
the	Supersoul;	
sarva
—
all;	
bhūtāni—
entities;	
ca—
also;	
ātmani—
in	the	Self;	
īkṣate—
does	see;	
yoga-
yukta-ātmā—
one	who	is	dovetailed	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness;	
sarvatra—
everywhere;	
sama-darśanaḥ—
seeing	equally.
TRANSLATION
A	true	yogī	observes	Me	in	all	beings,	and	also	sees	every	being	in	Me.
Indeed,	the	self-realized	man	sees	Me	everywhere.
PURPORT
A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	
yogī
	is	the	perfect	seer	because	he	sees	Kṛṣṇa,	the
Supreme,	situated	in	everyone's	heart	as	Supersoul	(Paramātmā).	
Īśvaraḥsarva-bhūtānāṁ	hṛd-deśe	'rjuna	tiṣṭhati.	
The	Lord	in	His	Paramātmā	feature
is	situated	within	both	the	heart	of	the	dog	and	that	of	a	
brāhmaṇa.	
The
perfect	
yogī
	knows	that	the	Lord	is	eternally	transcendental	and	is	not
materially	affected	by	His	presence	in	either	a	dog	or	a	
brāhmaṇa.	
That	is	the
supreme	neutrality	of	the	Lord.	The	individual	soul	is	also	situated	in	the
individual	heart,	but	he	is	not	present	in	all	hearts.	That	is	the	distinction
between	the	individual	soul	and	the	Supersoul.	One	who	is	not	factually	in	the
practice	of	
yoga	
cannot	see	so	clearly.	A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	can	see
Kṛṣṇa	in	the	heart	of	both	the	believer	and	nonbeliever.	In	the	
smṛti	
this	is
confirmed	as	follows:	
ātatatvāc	ca	mātṛtvād	ātmā	hi	paramo	hariḥ.
The	Lord,	being	the	source	of	all	beings,	is	like	the	mother	and	the
maintainer.	As	the	mother	is	neutral	to	all	different	kinds	of	children,	the
Supreme	Father	(or	Mother)	is	also.	Consequently	the	Supersoul	is	always	in
every	living	being.	Outwardly,	also,	every	living	being	is	situated	in	the
energy	of	the	Lord.	As	will	be	explained	in	the	Seventh	Chapter,	the	Lord	has,
primarily,	two	energies—the	spiritual	(or	superior)	and	the	material	(or
inferior).	The	living	entity,	although	part	of	the	superior	energy,	is	conditioned
by	the	inferior	energy;	the	living	entity	is	always	in	the	Lord's	energy.	Every
living	entity	is	situated	in	Him	in	one	way	or	another.	The	
yogī
	sees	equally
because	he	sees	that	all	living	entities,	although	in	different	situations
according	to	the	results	of	fruitive	work,	in	all	circumstances	remain	the
servants	of	God.	While	in	the	material	energy,	the	living	entity	serves	the
material	senses;	and	while	in	spiritual	energy,	he	serves	the	Supreme	Lord
directly.	In	either	case	the	living	entity	is	the	servant	of	God.	This	vision	of
equality	is	perfect	in	a	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
TEXT	30
य ो
	
म ा ं
	
प ᇽ य ि त
	
स व ᆼ त ् र
	
स व ᆾ
	
च
	
म ि य
	
प ᇽ य ि त
	
।
त ᇿ य ा ह ं
	
न
	
प ् र ण ᇽ य ा ि म
	
स
	
च
	
म े
	
न
	
प ् र ण ᇽ य ि त
	
॥
३ ०
॥
yo	māṁ	paśyati	sarvatra
sarvaṁ	ca	mayi	paśyati
tasyāhaṁ	na	praṇaśyāmi
sa	ca	me	na	praṇaśyati
yaḥ—
whoever;	
mām—
Me;	
paśyati—
sees;	
sarvatra—
everywhere;	
sarvam—everything;	
ca—
and;	
mayi—
in	Me;	
paśyati—
he	sees;	
tasya—
his;	
aham—
I;
	na
—not;	
praṇaśyāmi—
am	lost;	
saḥ—
he;	
ca—
also;	
me—
to	Me;	
na—
nor;
praṇaśyati—
is	lost.
TRANSLATION
For	one	who	sees	Me	everywhere	and	sees	everything	in	Me,	I	am	never
lost,	nor	is	he	ever	lost	to	Me.
PURPORT
A	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	certainly	sees	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	everywhere,	and
he	sees	everything	in	Kṛṣṇa.	Such	a	person	may	appear	to	see	all	separate
manifestations	of	the	material	nature,	but	in	each	and	every	instance	he	is
conscious	of	Kṛṣṇa,	knowing	that	everything	is	the	manifestation	of	Kṛṣṇa's
energy.	Nothing	can	exist	without	Kṛṣṇa,	and	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Lord	of	everything
—
this	is	the	basic	principle	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is
the	development	of	love	of	Kṛṣṇa
—
a	position	transcendental	even	to	material
liberation.	It	is	the	stage	beyond	self—realization	at	which	the	devotee
becomes	one	with	Kṛṣṇa	in	the	sense	that	Kṛṣṇa	becomes	everything	for	the
devotee,	and	the	devotee	becomes	full	in	loving	Kṛṣṇa.	An	intimate
relationship	between	the	Lord	and	the	devotee	then	exists.	In	that	stage,	the
living	entity	attains	his	immortality.	Nor	is	the	Personality	of	Godhead	ever
out	of	the	sight	of	the	devotee.	To	merge	in	Kṛṣṇa	is	spiritual	annihilation.	A
devotee	takes	no	such	risk.	It	is	stated	in	the	
Brahma-saṁhitā:
premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santaḥ	sadaiva	hṛdayeṣu	vilokayanti
yaṁ	śyāmasundaram	acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ
govindam	ādi-puruṣaṁ	tam	ahaṁ	bhajāmi
"I	worship	the	primeval	Lord,	Govinda,	who	is	always	seen	by	the	devotee
whose	eyes	are	anointed	with	the	pulp	of	love.	He	is	seen	in	His	eternal	form
of	Śyāmasundara	situated	within	the	heart	of	the	devotee."	(Bs.	5.38)
At	this	stage,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	never	disappears	from	the	sight	of	the	devotee,
nor	does	the	devotee	ever	lose	sight	of	the	Lord.	In	the	case	of	a	
yogī
	who	sees
the	Lord	as	Paramātmā	within	the	heart,	the	same	applies.	Such	a	
yogī	
turnsinto	a	pure	devotee	and	cannot	bear	to	live	for	a	moment	without	seeing	the
Lord	within	himself.
TEXT	31
स व ᆼ भ ू त ि ᇿ थ त ं
	
य ो
	
म ा ं
	
भ ज ᇰ य े क ᇰ व म ा ि ᇿ थ त ः
	
।
स व ᆼ थ ा
	
व त ᆼ म ा न ो ऽ ि प
	
स
	
य ो ग ी
	
म ि य
	
व त ᆼ त े
	
॥
३ १
॥
sarva-bhūta-sthitaṁ	yo	māṁ
bhajaty	ekatvam	āsthitaḥ
sarvathā	vartamāno	'pi
sa	yogī	mayi	vartate
sarva-bhūta-sthitam—
situated	in	everyone's	heart;	
yaḥ—
he	who;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
bhajati—
serves	in	devotional	service;	
ekatvam—
oneness;	
āsthitaḥ
—thus	situated;	
sarvathā—
in	all	respects;	
vartamānaḥ—
being	situated;	
api—
in	spite	of;	
saḥ—
he;	
yogī
—transcendentalist;	
mayi—
unto	Me;	
vartate—
remains.
TRANSLATION
The	yogī	who	knows	that	I	and	the	Supersoul	within	all	creatures	are
one	worships	Me	and	remains	always	in	Me	in	all	circumstances.
PURPORT
A	
yogī
	who	is	practicing	meditation	on	the	Supersoul	sees	within	himself
the	plenary	portion	of	Kṛṣṇa	as	Viṣṇu—with	four	hands,	holding	conchshell,
wheel,	club	and	lotus	flower.	The	
yogī
	should	know	that	Viṣṇu	is	not	different
from	Kṛṣṇa.	Kṛṣṇa	in	this	form	of	Supersoul	is	situated	in	everyone's	heart.
Furthermore,	there	is	no	difference	between	the	innumerable	Supersouls
present	in	the	innumerable	hearts	of	living	entities.	Nor	is	there	a	difference
between	a	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	always	engaged	in	the	transcendental
loving	service	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	a	perfect	
yogī
	engaged	in	meditation	on	the
Supersoul.	The	
yogī
	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness
—	
even	though	he	may	be
engaged	in	various	activities	while	in	material	existence
—
remains	alwayssituated	in	Kṛṣṇa.	This	is	confirmed	in	the	
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu	
of	Śrīla
Rūpa	Gosvāmī:	
nikhileṣu	avasthāsu	jīvanmukta	sa	ucyate.
	A	devotee	of	the
Lord,	always	acting	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	is	automatically	liberated.	In	the
Nārada-pañcarātra	
this	is	confirmed	in	this	way:
dik-kālādy-anavacchinne	kṛṣṇe	ceto	vidhāya	ca
tanmayo	bhavati	kṣipraṁ	jīvo	brahmaṇi	yojayet.
"By	concentrating	one's	attention	on	the	transcendental	form	of	Kṛṣṇa,	who	is
all-pervading	and	beyond	time	and	space,	one	becomes	absorbed	in	thinking
of	Kṛṣṇa	and	then	attains	the	happy	state	of	transcendental	association	with
Him."
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	the	highest	stage	of	trance	in	
yoga
	practice.	This
very	understanding	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	present	as	Paramātmā	in	everyone's	heart
makes	the	
yogī
	faultless.	The	
Vedas	
confirm	this	inconceivable	potency	of	the
Lord	as	follows:
eko	'pi	san	bahudhā	yo	'vabhāti
aiśvaryād	rūpam	ekaṁ	ca	sūryavad	bahudheyate.
"Viṣṇu	is	one,	and	yet	He	is	certainly	all-pervading.	By	His	inconceivable
potency,	in	spite	of	His	one	form,	He	is	present	everywhere.	As	the	sun,	He
appears	in	many	places	at	once."
TEXT	32
आ ᇰ म ौ प ᇸ य े न
	
स व ᆼ त ् र
	
स म ं
	
प ᇽ य ि त
	
य ो ऽ ज ु ᆼ न
	
।
स ु ख ं
	
व ा
	
य ि द
	
व ा
	
द ु ः ख ं
	
स
	
य ो ग ी
	
प र म ो
	
म त ः
	
॥
३ २
॥
ātmaupamyena	sarvatra
samaṁ	paśyati	yo	'rjuna
sukhaṁ	vā	yadi	vā	duḥkhaṁ
sa	yogī	paramo	mataḥ
ātma—
self;	
aupamyena—
by	comparison;	
sarvatra—
everywhere;	
samam—
equality;	
paśyati—
sees;	
yaḥ—
he	who;	
arjuna
—O	Arjuna;	
sukham
—
happiness;	
vā
—or;	
yadi—
if;	
vā
—
or;	duḥkham—
distress;	
saḥ—
such;	
yogī
—
transcendentalist;	
paramaḥ—
perfect;	
mataḥ—
considered.TRANSLATION
He	is	a	perfect	yogī	who,	by	comparison	to	his	own	self,	sees	the	true
equality	of	all	beings,	both	in	their	happiness	and	distress,	O	Arjuna!
PURPORT
One	who	is	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	is	a	perfect	
yogī
;	he	is	aware	of	everyone's
happiness	and	distress	by	dint	of	his	own	personal	experience.	The	cause	of
the	distress	of	a	living	entity	is	forgetfulness	of	his	relationship	with	God.	And
the	cause	of	happiness	is	knowing	Kṛṣṇa	to	be	the	supreme	enjoyer	of	all	the
activities	of	the	human	being.	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	proprietor	of	all	lands	and	planets.
The	perfect	
yogī
	is	the	sincerest	friend	of	all	living	entities.	He	knows	that	the
living	being	who	is	conditioned	by	the	modes	of	material	nature	is	subjected
to	the	threefold	material	miseries	due	to	forgetfulness	of	his	relationship	with
Kṛṣṇa.	Because	one	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	happy,	he	tries	to	distribute	the
knowledge	of	Kṛṣṇa	everywhere.	Since	the	perfect	
yogī	
tries	to	broadcast	the
importance	of	becoming	Kṛṣṇa	conscious,	he	is	the	best	philanthropist	in	the
world,	and	he	is	the	dearest	servitor	of	the	Lord.	
Na	tasmāt	kaścid	me	priyakṛt
tamaḥ.	
In	other	words,	a	devotee	of	the	Lord	always	looks	to	the	welfare	of	all
living	entities,	and	in	this	way	he	is	factually	the	friend	of	everyone.	He	is	the
best	
yogī	
because	he	does	not	desire	perfection	in	
yoga	
for	his	personal
benefit,	but	tries	for	others	also.	He	does	not	envy	his	fellow	living	entities.
Here	is	a	contrast	between	a	pure	devotee	of	the	Lord	and	a	
yogī
	interested
only	in	his	personal	elevation.	The	
yogī	
who	has	withdrawn	to	a	secluded
place	in	order	to	meditate	perfectly	may	not	be	as	perfect	as	a	devotee	who	is
trying	his	best	to	turn	every	man	toward	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
TEXT	33
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
य ो ऽ य ं
	
य ो ग ᇿ ᇰ व य ा
	
प ् र ो ᇧ त ः
	
स ा ᇸ य े न
	
म ध ु स ू द न
	
।
ए त ᇿ य ा ह ं
	
न
	
प ᇽ य ा ि म
	
च ᇮ च ल ᇰ व ा ि ᇰ ᇿ थ ि त ं
	
ि ᇿ थ र ा म ्
	
॥
३ ३
॥
arjuna	uvāca
yo	'yaṁ	yogas	tvayā	proktaḥsāmyena	madhusūdana
etasyāhaṁ	na	paśyāmi
cañcalatvāt	sthitiṁ	sthirām
arjunaḥ	uvāca—
Arjuna	said;	
yaḥ—
the	system;	
ayam—
this;	
yogaḥ—
mysticism;	
tvayā—
by	You;	
proktaḥ—
described;	
sāmyena
—generally;
madhusūdana—
O	killer	of	the	demon	Madhu;	
etasya
—of	this;	
aham
—I;	
na
—
do	not;	
paśyāmi—
see;	
cañcalatvāt—
due	to	being	restless;	
sthitim—
situation;
sthirām—
stable.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	said:	O	Madhusūdana,	the	system	of	yoga	which	you	have
summarized	appears	impractical	and	unendurable	to	me,	for	the	mind	is
restless	and	unsteady.
PURPORT
The	system	of	mysticism	described	by	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	to	Arjuna	beginning	with
the	words	
śucau	deśe	
and	ending	with	
yogī	paramaḥ
	is	here	being	rejected	by
Arjuna	out	of	a	feeling	of	inability.	It	is	not	possible	for	an	ordinary	man	to
leave	home	and	go	to	a	secluded	place	in	the	mountains	or	jungles	to	practice
yoga	
in	this	age	of	Kali.	The	present	age	is	characterized	by	a	bitter	struggle
for	a	life	of	short	duration.	People	are	not	serious	about	self-realization	even
by	simple,	practical	means,	and	what	to	speak	of	this	difficult	
yoga	
system,
which	regulates	the	mode	of	living,	the	manner	of	sitting,	selection	of	place,
and	detachment	of	the	mind	from	material	engagements.	As	a	practical	man,
Arjuna	thought	it	was	impossible	to	follow	this	system	of	
yoga,	
even	though
he	was	favorably	endowed	in	many	ways.	He	belonged	to	the	royal	family	and
was	highly	elevated	in	terms	of	numerous	qualities;	he	was	a	great	warrior,	he
had	great	longevity,	and,	above	all,	he	was	the	most	intimate	friend	of	Lord
Kṛṣṇa,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Five	thousand	years	ago,	Arjuna
had	much	better	facilities	then	we	do	now,	yet	he	refused	to	accept	this	system
of	
yoga.	
In	fact,	we	do	not	find	any	record	in	history	of	his	practicing	it	at	any
time.	Therefore	this	system	must	be	considered	generally	impossible	in	this
age	of	Kali.	Of	course	it	may	be	possible	for	some	very	few,	rare	men,	but	for
the	people	in	general	it	is	an	impossible	proposal.	If	this	were	so	five	thousandyears	ago,	then	what	of	the	present	day?	Those	who	are	imitating	this	
yoga
system	in	different	so-called	schools	and	societies,	although	complacent,	are
certainly	wasting	their	time.	They	are	completely	in	ignorance	of	the	desired
goal.
TEXT	34
च ᇮ च ल ं
	
ि ह
	
म न ः
	
क ृ ᇾ ण
	
प ् र म ा ि थ
	
ब ल व ራ ृ ढ म ्
	
।
त ᇿ य ा ह ं
	
ि न ग ् र ह ं
	
म ᇳ य े
	
व ा य ो ि र व
	
स ु द ु ᇾ क र म ्
	
॥
३ ४
॥
cañcalaṁ	hi	manaḥ	kṛṣṇa
pramāthi	balavad	dṛḍham
tasyāhaṁ	nigrahaṁ	manye
vāyor	iva	suduṣkaram
cañcalam
—flickering;	
hi—
certainly;	
manaḥ
—mind;	
kṛṣṇa
—O	Kṛṣṇa;
pramāthi—
agitating;	
balavat—
strong;	
dṛḍham—
obstinate;	
tasya—
its;	
aham
—
I;
	nigraham
—subduing;	
manye
—think;	
vāyoḥ
—of	the	wind;	
iva
—like;
suduṣkaram
—difficult.
TRANSLATION
For	the	mind	is	restless,	turbulent,	obstinate	and	very	strong,	O	Kṛṣṇa,
and	to	subdue	it	is,	it	seems	to	me,	more	difficult	than	controlling	the
wind.
PURPORT
The	mind	is	so	strong	and	obstinate	that	it	sometimes	overcomes	the
intelligence,	although	mind	is	supposed	to	be	subservient	to	the	intelligence.
For	a	man	in	the	practical	world	who	has	to	fight	so	many	opposing	elements,
it	is	certainly	very	difficult	to	control	the	mind.	Artificially,	one	may	establish
a	mental	equilibrium	toward	both	friend	and	enemy,	but	ultimately	no	worldly
man	can	do	so,	for	this	is	more	difficult	than	controlling	the	raging	wind.	In
the	Vedic	literatures	it	is	said:ātmānaṁ	rathinaṁ	viddhi	śarīraṁ	ratham	eva	ca
buddhintu	sārathiṁ	viddhi	manaḥ	pragraham	eva	ca
indriyāṇi	hayānāhur	viṣayāṁs	teṣu	gocarān
ātmendriya-mano-yukto	bhoktety	āhur	manīṣiṇaḥ.
"The	individual	is	the	passenger	in	the	car	of	the	material	body,	and
intelligence	is	the	driver.	Mind	is	the	driving	instrument,	and	the	senses	are	the
horses.	The	self	is	thus	the	enjoyer	or	sufferer	in	the	association	of	the	mind
and	senses.	So	it	is	understood	by	great	thinkers."	Intelligence	is	supposed	to
direct	the	mind,	but	the	mind	is	so	strong	and	obstinate	that	it	often	overcomes
even	one's	own	intelligence.	Such	a	strong	mind	is	supposed	to	be	controlled
by	the	practice	of	
yoga,	
but	such	practice	is	never	practical	for	a	worldly
person	like	Arjuna.	And	what	can	we	say	of	modern	man?	The	simile	used
here	is	appropriate:	one	cannot	capture	the	blowing	wind.	And	it	is	even	more
difficult	to	capture	the	turbulent	mind.	The	easiest	way	to	control	the	mind,	as
suggested	by	Lord	Caitanya,	is	chanting	"Hare	Kṛṣṇa,"	the	great	
mantra	
for
deliverance,	in	all	humility.	The	method	prescribed	is	
sa	vai	manaḥ	kṛṣṇa-
padāravindayoḥ:	
one	must	engage	one's	mind	fully	in	Kṛṣṇa.	Only	then	will
there	remain	no	other	engagements	to	agitate	the	mind.
TEXT	35
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
अ स ं श य ं
	
म ह ा ब ा ह ो
	
म न ो
	
द ु ि न ᆼ ग ् र ह ं
	
च ल म ्
	
।
अ ᇷ य ा स े न
	
त ु
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
व ैर ा ᇩ य े ण
	
च
	
ग ृ ቋ त े
	
॥
३ ५
॥
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
asaṁśayaṁ	mahā-bāho
mano	durnigrahaṁ	calam
abhyāsena	tu	kaunteya
vairāgyeṇa	ca	gṛhyate
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
asaṁśayam
—
undoubtedly;	
mahā-bāho
—O	mighty-armed	one;	
manaḥ
—mind;	
durnigraham
—difficult	to	curb;	
calam
—flickering;	
abhyāsena
—by	practice;	
tu
—but;
kaunteya
—O	son	of	Kuntī;	
vairāgyeṇa
—by	detachment;	
ca—
also;	
gṛhyate
—
can	be	so	controlled.TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	O	mighty-armed	son	of	Kuntī,	it	is	undoubtedly
very	difficult	to	curb	the	restless	mind,	but	it	is	possible	by	constant
practice	and	by	detachment.
PURPORT
The	difficulty	of	controlling	the	obstinate	mind,	as	expressed	by	Arjuna,	is
accepted	by	the	Personality	of	Godhead.	But	at	the	same	time	He	suggests	that
by	practice	and	detachment	it	is	possible.	What	is	that	practice?	In	the	present
age	no	one	can	observe	strict	rules	and	regulations,	such	as	placing	oneself	in
a	sacred	place,	focusing	the	mind	on	the	Supersoul,	restraining	the	senses	and
mind,	observing	celibacy,	remaining	alone,	etc.	By	the	practice	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	however,	one	engages	in	nine	types	of	devotional	service	to	the
Lord.	The	first	and	foremost	of	such	devotional	engagements	is	hearing	about
Kṛṣṇa.	This	is	a	very	powerful	transcendental	method	for	purging	the	mind	of
all	misgivings.	The	more	one	hears	about	Kṛṣṇa,	the	more	one	becomes
enlightened	and	detached	from	everything	that	draws	the	mind	away	from
Kṛṣṇa.	By	detaching	the	mind	from	activities	not	devoted	to	the	Lord,	one	can
very	easily	learn	
vairāgya.	Vairāgya
	means	detachment	from	matter	and
engagement	of	the	mind	in	spirit.	Impersonal	spiritual	detachment	is	more
difficult	than	attaching	the	mind	to	the	activities	of	Kṛṣṇa.	This	is	practical
because	by	hearing	about	Kṛṣṇa	one	becomes	automatically	attached	to	the
Supreme	Spirit.	This	attachment	is	called	
pareśānubhūti	
spiritual	satisfaction.
It	is	just	like	the	feeling	of	satisfaction	a	hungry	man	has	for	every	morsel	of
food	he	eats.	Similarly,	by	discharge	of	devotional	service,	one	feels
transcendental	satisfaction	as	the	mind	becomes	detached	from	material
objectives.	It	is	something	like	curing	a	disease	by	expert	treatment	and
appropriate	diet.	Hearing	of	the	transcendental	activities	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is
therefore	expert	treatment	for	the	mad	mind,	and	eating	the	foodstuff	offered
to	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	appropriate	diet	for	the	suffering	patient.	This	treatment	is	the
process	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
TEXT	36
अ स ं य त ा ᇰ म न ा
	
य ो ग ो
	
द ु ᇾ प ् र ा प
	
इ ि त
	
म े
	
म ि त ः
	
।व ᇽ य ा ᇰ म न ा
	
त ु
	
य त त ा
	
श ᇧ य ो ऽ व ा ᇴ त ु म ु प ा य त ः
	
॥
३ ६
॥
asaṁyatātmanā	yogo
duṣprāpa	iti	me	matiḥ
vaśyātmanā	tu	yatatā
śakyo	'vāptum	upāyataḥ
asaṁyata—
unbridled;	
ātmanā—
by	the	mind;	
yogaḥ—
self-realization;
duṣprāpaḥ
—difficult	to	obtain;	
iti
—thus;
	me—
My;
	matiḥ
—opinion;	
vaśya
—
controlled;	
ātmanā—
by	the	mind;	
tu—
but;	
yatatā
—while	endeavoring;	
śakyaḥ
—
practical;	
avāptum—
to	achieve;	
upāyataḥ
—appropriate	means.
TRANSLATION
For	one	whose	mind	is	unbridled,	self-realization	is	difficult	work.	But
he	whose	mind	is	controlled	and	who	strives	by	right	means	is	assured	of
success.	That	is	My	opinion.
PURPORT
The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	declares	that	one	who	does	not	accept
the	proper	treatment	to	detach	the	mind	from	material	engagement	can	hardly
achieve	success	in	self-realization.	Trying	to	practice	
yoga	
while	engaging	the
mind	in	material	enjoyment	is	like	trying	to	ignite	a	fire	while	pouring	water
on	it.	Similarly,	
yoga	
practice	without	mental	control	is	a	waste	of	time.	Such
a	show	of	
yoga	
practice	may	be	materially	lucrative,	but	it	is	useless	as	far	as
spiritual	realization	is	concerned.	Therefore,	the	mind	must	be	controlled	by
engaging	it	constantly	in	the	transcendental	loving	service	of	the	Lord.	Unless
one	is	engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	he	cannot	steadily	control	the	mind.	A
Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	easily	achieves	the	result	of	
yoga	
practice	without
separate	endeavor,	but	a	
yoga	
practitioner	cannot	achieve	success	without
becoming	Kṛṣṇa	conscious.
TEXT	37
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।अ य ि त ः
	
श ् र ሬ य ो प े त ो
	
य ो ग ा ᇫ च ि ल त म ा न स ः
	
।
अ प ् र ा ᇴ य
	
य ो ग स ं ि स द ् ि ध ं
	
क ा ं
	
ग ि त ं
	
क ृ ᇾ ण
	
ग ᇫ छ ि त
	
॥
३ ७
॥
arjuna	uvāca
ayatiḥ	śraddhayopeto
yogāc	calita-mānasaḥ
aprāpya	yoga-saṁsiddhiṁ
kāṁ	gatiṁ	kṛṣṇa	gacchati
arjunaḥ	uvāca—
Arjuna	said;	
ayatiḥ—
unsuccessful	transcendentalist;
śraddhayā—
with	faith;	
upetaḥ—
engaged;	
yogāt—
from	the	mystic	link;	
calita
—
deviated;	
mānasaḥ—
of	one	who	has	such	a	mind;	
aprāpya—
failing;	
yoga-
saṁsiddhim—
highest	perfection	in	mysticism;	
kām—
which;	
gatim	
—
destination;	
kṛṣṇa
—O	Kṛṣṇa;	
gacchati—
achieves.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	said:	What	is	the	destination	of	the	man	of	faith	who	does	not
persevere,	who	in	the	beginning	takes	to	the	process	of	self-realization	but
who	later	desists	due	to	worldly-	mindedness	and	thus	does	not	attain
perfection	in	mysticism?
PURPORT
The	path	of	self-realization	or	mysticism	is	described	in	the	
Bhagavad-	gītā.
The	basic	principle	of	self-realization	is	knowledge	that	the	living	entity	is	not
this	material	body	but	that	he	is	different	from	it	and	that	his	happiness	is	in
eternal	life,	bliss	and	knowledge.	These	are	transcendental,	beyond	both	body
and	mind.	Self-	realization	is	sought	by	the	path	of	knowledge,	the	practice	of
the	eightfold	system	or	by	
bhakti-yoga.	
In	each	of	these	processes	one	has	to
realize	the	constitutional	position	of	the	living	entity,	his	relationship	with
God,	and	the	activities	whereby	he	can	reestablish	the	lost	link	and	achieve	the
highest	perfectional	stage	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Following	any	of	the
above-mentioned	three	methods,	one	is	sure	to	reach	the	supreme	goal	sooner
or	later.	This	was	asserted	by	the	Lord	in	the	Second	Chapter:	even	a	little
endeavor	on	the	transcendental	path	offers	a	great	hope	for	deliverance.	Out	of
these	three	methods,	the	path	of	
bhakti-yoga
	is	especially	suitable	for	this	agebecause	it	is	the	most	direct	method	of	God	realization.	To	be	doubly	assured,
Arjuna	is	asking	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	to	confirm	His	former	statement.	One	may
sincerely	accept	the	path	of	self-realization,	but	the	process	of	cultivation	of
knowledge	and	the	practice	of	the	eightfold	
yoga	
system	are	generally	very
difficult	for	this	age.	Therefore,	despite	constant	endeavor,	one	may	fail	for
many	reasons.	First	of	all,	one	may	not	be	following	the	process.	To	pursue
the	transcendental	path	is	more	or	less	to	declare	war	on	illusory	energy.
Consequently,	whenever	a	person	tries	to	escape	the	clutches	of	the	illusory
energy,	she	tries	to	defeat	the	practitioner	by	various	allurements.	A
conditioned	soul	is	already	allured	by	the	modes	of	material	energy,	and	there
is	every	chance	of	being	allured	again,	even	while	performing	transcendental
disciplines.	This	is	called	
yogāt	calita-mānasaḥ:	
deviation	from	the
transcendental	path.	Arjuna	is	inquisitive	to	know	the	results	of	deviation	from
the	path	of	self-realization.
TEXT	38
क ि ᇫ च ᇳ न ो भ य ि व भ ् र ᇾ ट ि ᇽ छ ᇳ न ा भ ् र ि म व
	
न ᇽ य ि त
	
।
अ प ् र ि त ᇾ ठ ो
	
म ह ा ब ा ह ो
	
ि व म ू ढ ो
	
ब ् र ቊ ण ः
	
प ि थ
	
॥
३ ८
॥
kaccin	nobhaya-vibhraṣṭaś
chinnābhram	iva	naśyati
apratiṣṭho	mahā-bāho
vimūḍho	brahmaṇaḥ	pathi
kaccit—
whether;	
na—
not;	
ubhaya—
both;	
vibhraṣṭaḥ—
deviated	from;
chinna—
fallen;	
abhram—
cloud;	
iva—
likened;	
naśyati—
perishes;	
apratiṣṭhaḥ
—without	any	position;	
mahā-bāho—
O	mighty-armed	Kṛṣṇa;	
vimūḍhaḥ—
bewildered;	
brahmaṇaḥ—
of	Transcendence;	
pathi
—on	the	path.
TRANSLATION
O	mighty-armed	Kṛṣṇa,	does	not	such	a	man,	being	deviated	from	the
path	of	Transcendence,	perish	like	a	riven	cloud,	with	no	position	in	any
sphere?PURPORT
There	are	two	ways	to	progress.	Those	who	are	materialists	have	no	interest
in	Transcendence;	therefore	they	are	more	interested	in	material	advancement
by	economic	development,	or	in	promotion	to	the	higher	planets	by
appropriate	work.	When	one	takes	to	the	path	of	Transcendence,	one	has	to
cease	all	material	activities	and	sacrifice	all	forms	of	so-called	material
happiness.	If	the	aspiring	transcendentalist	fails,	then	he	apparently	loses	both
ways;	in	other	words,	he	can	enjoy	neither	material	happiness	nor	spiritual
success.	He	has	no	position;	he	is	like	a	riven	cloud.	A	cloud	in	the	sky
sometimes	deviates	from	a	small	cloud	and	joins	a	big	one.	But	if	it	cannot
join	a	big	one,	then	it	is	blown	away	by	the	wind	and	becomes	a	nonentity	in
the	vast	sky.	The	
brahmaṇaḥ	pathi
	is	the	path	of	transcendental	realization
through	knowing	oneself	to	be	spiritual	in	essence,	part	and	parcel	of	the
Supreme	Lord	who	is	manifested	as	Brahman,	Paramātmā	and	Bhagavān.
Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	fullest	manifestation	of	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth,	and
therefore	one	who	is	surrendered	to	the	Supreme	Person	is	a	successful
transcendentalist.	To	reach	this	goal	of	life	through	Brahman	and	Paramātmā
realization	takes	many,	many	births:	
Bahūnāṁ	janmanām	ante.	
Therefore	the
supermost	of	transcendental	realization	is	
bhakti-yoga	
or	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,
the	direct	method.
TEXT	39
ए त ᇳ म े
	
स ं श य ं
	
क ृ ᇾ ण
	
छ े ሧ ु म ह ᆼ ᇿ य श े ष त ः
	
।
ᇰ व द ᇳ य ः
	
स ं श य ᇿ य ा ᇿ य
	
छ े ሧ ा
	
न
	
ቋ ु प प ሱ त े
	
॥
३ ९
॥
etan	me	saṁśayaṁ	kṛṣṇa
chettum	arhasy	aśeṣataḥ
tvad-anyaḥ	saṁśayasyāsya
chettā	na	hy	upapadyate
etat—
this	is;	
me—
my;	
saṁśayam—
doubt;	
kṛṣṇa
—O	Kṛṣṇa;	
chettum—
to
dispel;	
arhasi—
requested	to	do;	
aśeṣataḥ—
completely;	
tvat—
Yourself;	
anyaḥ
—
without;	
saṁśayāsya—
of	the	doubt;	
asya—
of	this;	
chettā—
remover;	
na
—
never;	
hi—
certainly;	
upapadyate—
to	be	found.TRANSLATION
This	is	my	doubt	O	Kṛṣṇa,	and	I	ask	You	to	dispel	it	completely.	But	for
Yourself,	no	one	is	to	be	found	who	can	destroy	this	doubt.
PURPORT
Kṛṣṇa	is	the	perfect	knower	of	past,	present	and	future.	In	the	beginning	of
the	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
the	Lord	said	that	all	living	entities	exist	individually	in
the	past,	that	they	exist	now	in	the	present,	and	that	they	continue	to	retain
individual	identity	in	the	future,	even	after	liberation	from	the	material
entanglement.	So	He	has	already	cleared	up	the	question	of	the	future	of	the
individual	living	entity.	Now,	Arjuna	wants	to	know	of	the	future	of	the
unsuccessful	transcendentalist.	No	one	is	equal	to	or	above	Kṛṣṇa,	and
certainly	the	so-called	great	sages	and	philosophers	who	are	at	the	mercy	of
material	nature	cannot	equal	Him.	Therefore	the	verdict	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	final
and	complete	answer	to	all	doubts	because	He	knows	past,	present	and	future
perfectly—but	no	one	knows	Him.	Kṛṣṇa	and	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	devotees	alone
can	know	what	is	what.
TEXT	40
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
प ा थ ᆼ
	
न ै व े ह
	
न ा म ु त ् र
	
ि व न ा श ᇿ त ᇿ य
	
ि व ሱ त े
	
।
न
	
ि ह
	
क ᇺ य ा ण क ृ ᇰ क ि ᇽ च ራ ु ग ᆼ ि त ं
	
त ा त
	
ग ᇫ छ ि त
	
॥
४ ०
॥
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
pārtha	naiveha	nāmutra
vināśas	tasya	vidyate
na	hi	kalyāṇa-kṛt	kaścid
durgatiṁ	tāta	gacchati
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
pārtha
—O
son	of	Prthā;	
na	eva
—never	is	it	so;	
iha
—in	this	material	world;	
na
—never;
amutra
—in	the	next	life;	
vināśaḥ
—destruction;	
tasya
—his;	
vidyate
—exists;na
—never;	
hi
—certainly;	
kalyāṇa-kṛt—
one	who	is	engaged	in	auspicious
activities;	
kaścit—
anyone;	
durgatim
—degradation;	
tāta
—thereafter;	
gacchati
—going.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	Son	of	Pṛthā,	a	transcendentalist	engaged	in
auspicious	activities	does	not	meet	with	destruction	either	in	this	world	or
in	the	spiritual	world;	one	who	does	good,	My	friend,	is	never	overcome
by	evil.
PURPORT
In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
	(1.5.17)	Śrī	Nārada	Muni	instructs	Vyāsadeva	as
follows:
tyaktvā	sva-dharmaṁ	caraṇāmbujaṁ	harer
bhajann	apakko	'tha	patet	tato	yadi
yatra	kva	vābhadram	abhūd	amuṣya	kiṁ
ko	vārtha	āpto	'bhajatāṁ	sva-dharmataḥ
"If	someone	gives	up	all	material	prospects	and	takes	complete	shelter	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	there	is	no	loss	or	degradation	in	any	way.
On	the	other	hand	a	nondevotee	may	fully	engage	in	his	occupational	duties
and	yet	not	gain	anything."	For	material	prospects,	there	are	many	activities
both	scriptural	and	customary.	A	transcendentalist	is	supposed	to	give	up	all
material	activities	for	the	sake	of	spiritual	advancement	in	life,	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	One	may	argue	that	by	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	one	may	attain	the
highest	perfection	if	it	is	completed,	but	if	one	does	not	attainsuch	a
perfectional	stage,	then	he	loses	both	materially	and	spiritually.	It	is	enjoined
in	the	scriptures	that	one	has	to	suffer	the	reaction	of	not	executing	prescribed
duties;	therefore	one	who	fails	to	discharge	transcendental	activities	properly
becomes	subjected	to	these	reactions.	The	
Bhāgavatam	
assures	the
unsuccessful	transcendentalist	that	there	need	be	no	worries.	Even	though	he
may	be	subjected	to	the	reaction	of	not	perfectly	executing	prescribed	duties,
he	is	still	not	a	loser,	because	auspicious	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	never
forgotten,	and	one	so	engaged	will	continue	to	be	so	even	if	he	is	lowborn	inthe	next	life.	On	the	other	hand,	one	who	simply	follows	strictly	the	prescribed
duties	need	not	necessarily	attain	auspicious	results	if	he	is	lacking	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.
The	purport	may	be	understood	as	follows:	humanity	may	be	divided	into
two	sections,	namely,	the	regulated	and	the	nonregulated.	Those	who	are
engaged	simply	in	bestial	sense	gratifications	without	knowledge	of	their	next
life	or	spiritual	salvation	belong	to	the	nonregulated	section.	And	those	who
follow	the	principles	of	prescribed	duties	in	the	scriptures	are	classified
amongst	the	regulated	section.	The	nonregulated	section,	both	civilized	and
noncivilized,	educated	and	noneducated,	strong	and	weak,	are	full	of	animal
propensities.	Their	activities	are	never	auspicious	because,	enjoying	the
animal	propensities	of	eating,	sleeping,	defending	and	mating,	they
perpetually	remain	in	material	existence,	which	is	always	miserable.	On	the
other	hand,	those	who	are	regulated	by	scriptural	injunctions	and	thus
gradually	rise	to	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	certainly	progress	in	life.
Those	who	are	then	following	the	path	of	auspiciousness	can	be	divided
into	three	sections,	namely,	1)	the	followers	of	scriptural	rules	and	regulations
who	are	enjoying	material	prosperity,	2)	those	who	are	trying	to	find	out	the
ultimate	liberation	from	material	existence,	and	3)	those	who	are	devotees	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Those	who	are	following	the	rules	and	regulations	of	the
scriptures	for	material	happiness	may	be	further	divided	into	two	classes:
those	who	are	fruitive	workers	and	those	who	desire	no	fruit	for	sense
gratification.	Those	who	are	after	fruitive	results	for	sense	gratification	may
be	elevated	to	a	higher	standard	of	life-even	to	the	higher	planets;	but	still,
because	they	are	not	free	from	material	existence,	they	are	not	following	the
truly	auspicious	path.	The	only	auspicious	activities	are	those	which	lead	one
to	liberation.	Any	activity	which	is	not	aimed	at	ultimate	self—realization	or
liberation	from	the	material	bodily	concept	of	life	is	not	at	all	auspicious.
Activity	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	the	only	auspicious	activity,	and	anyone
who	voluntarily	accepts	all	bodily	discomforts	for	the	sake	of	making	progress
on	the	path	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	can	be	called	a	perfect	transcendentalist
under	severe	austerity.	And	because	the	eightfold	
yoga	
system	is	directed
toward	the	ultimate	realization	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	such	practice	is	also
auspicious,	and	no	one	who	is	trying	his	best	in	this	matter	need	fear
degradation.
TEXT	41प ् र ा ᇴ य
	
प ु ᇯ य क ृ त ा ं
	
ल ो क ा न ु ि ष ᇰ व ा
	
श ा ᇽ व त ी ः
	
स म ा ः
	
।
श ु च ी न ा ं
	
श ् र ी म त ा ं
	
ग े ह े
	
य ो ग भ ् र ᇾ ट ो ऽ ि भ ज ा य त े
	
॥
४ १
॥
prāpya	puṇya-kṛtāṁ	lokān
uṣitvā	śāśvatīḥ	samāḥ
śucīnāṁ	śrīmatāṁ	gehe
yoga-bhraṣṭo	'bhijāyate
prāpya—
after	achieving;	
puṇya-kṛtām—
of	those	who	performed	pious
activities;	
lokān—
planets;	
uṣitvā—
after	dwelling;	
śāśvatīḥ—
many;	
samāḥ—
years;	
śucīnām—
of	the	pious;	
śrīmatām—
of	the	prosperous;	
gehe—
in	the
house	of;	
yoga-bhraṣṭaḥ—
one	who	is	fallen	from	the	path	of	self-realization;
abhijāyate—
takes	his	birth.
TRANSLATION
The	unsuccessful	yogī,	after	many,	many	years	of	enjoyment	on	the
planets	of	the	pious	living	entities,	is	born	into	a	family	of	righteous
people,	or	into	a	family	of	rich	aristocracy.
PURPORT
The	unsuccessful	
yogīs	
are	divided	into	two	classes:	one	is	fallen	after	very
little	progress,	and	one	is	fallen	after	long	practice	of	
yoga.	
The	
yogī
	who	falls
after	a	short	period	of	practice	goes	to	the	higher	planets	where	pious	living
entities	are	allowed	to	enter.	After	prolonged	life	there,	he	is	sent	back	again
to	this	planet,	to	take	birth	in	the	family	of	a	righteous	
brāhmaṇa	vaiṣṇava	
or
of	aristocratic	merchants.
The	real	purpose	of	
yoga	
practice	is	to	achieve	the	highest	perfection	of
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	But	those	who	do	not	persevere	to	such	an	extent	and
fail	due	to	material	allurements	are	allowed,	by	the	grace	of	the	Lord,	to	make
full	utilization	of	their	material	propensities.	And	after	that,	they	are	given
opportunities	to	live	prosperous	lives	in	righteous	or	aristocratic	families.
Those	who	are	born	in	such	families	may	take	advantage	of	the	facilities	and
try	to	elevate	themselves	to	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.TEXT	42
अ थ व ा
	
य ो ि ग न ा म े व
	
क ु ल े
	
भ व ि त
	
ध ी म त ा म ्
	
।
ए त द ् ि ध
	
द ु ल ᆼ भ त र ं
	
ल ो क े
	
ज ᇳ म
	
य द ी द ृ श म ्
	
॥
४ २
॥
athavā	yoginām	eva
kule	bhavati	dhīmatām
etaddhi	durlabhataraṁ
loke	janma	yad	īdṛśam
athavā
—or;	
yoginām—
of	learned	transcendentalists;	
eva—
certainly;	
kule
—
in	the	family	of;	
bhavati—
takes	birth;	
dhīmatām—
of	those	who	are	endowed
with	great	wisdom;	
etat—
this;	
hi—
certainly;	
durlabhataram—
very	rare;	
loke
—
in	this	world;	
janma—
birth;	
yat
—that	which;	
īdṛśam
—like	this.
TRANSLATION
Or	he	takes	his	birth	in	a	family	of	transcendentalists	who	are	surely
great	in	wisdom.	Verily,	such	a	birth	is	rare	in	this	world.
PURPORT
Birth	in	a	family	of	
yogīs	
or	transcendentalists
—
those	with	great	wisdom
—
is	praised	herein	because	the	child	born	in	such	a	family	receives	spiritual
impetus	from	the	very	beginning	of	his	life.	It	is	especially	the	case	in	the
ācārya	
or	
gosvāmī	
families.	Such	families	are	very	learned	and	devoted	by
tradition	and	training,	and	thus	they	become	spiritual	masters.	In	India	there
are	many	such	
ācārya	
families,	but	they	have	now	degenerated	due	to
insufficient	education	and	training.	By	the	grace	of	the	Lord,	there	are	still
families	that	foster	transcendentalists	generation	after	generation.	It	is
certainly	very	fortunate	to	take	birth	in	such	families.	Fortunately,	both	our
spiritual	master,	Om	Viṣṇupāda	Śrī	Śrīmad	Bhaktisiddhānta	Sarasvatī
Gosvāmī	Mahārāja,	and	our	humble	self,	had	the	opportunity	to	take	birth	in
such	families,	by	the	grace	of	the	Lord,	and	both	of	us	were	trained	in	the
devotional	service	of	the	Lord	from	the	very	beginning	of	our	lives.	Later	on
we	met	by	the	order	of	the	transcendental	system.TEXT	43
त त ् र
	
त ं
	
ब ु द ् ि ध स ं य ो ग ं
	
ल भ त े
	
प ौ व ᆼद े ि ह क म ्
	
।
य त त े
	
च
	
त त ो
	
भ ू य ः
	
स ं ि स ሬ ौ
	
क ु ኄ न ᇳ द न
	
॥
४ ३
॥
tatra	taṁ	buddhi-saṁyogaṁ
labhate	paurva-dehikam
yatate	ca	tato	bhūyaḥ
saṁsiddhau	kuru-nandana
tatra—
thereupon;	
tam—
that;	
buddhi-saṁyogam—
revival	of	such
consciousness;	
labhate—
regains;	
paurva—
previous;	
dehikam—
bodily
consciousness;	
yatate—
endeavors;	
ca—
also;	
tataḥ—
thereafter;	
bhūyaḥ
—
again;	
saṁsiddhau—
for	perfection;	
kuru-nandana
—O	son	of	Kuru.
TRANSLATION
On	taking	such	a	birth,	he	again	revives	the	divine	consciousness	of	his
previous	life,	and	he	tries	to	make	further	progress	in	order	to	achieve
complete	success,	O	son	of	Kuru.
PURPORT
King	Bharata,	who	took	his	third	birth	in	the	family	of	a	good	
brāhmaṇa,	
is
an	example	of	good	birth	for	the	revival	of	previous	transcendental
consciousness.	King	Bharata	was	the	Emperor	of	the	world,	and	since	his	time
this	planet	is	known	among	the	demigods	as	Bhāratavarṣa.	Formerly	it	was
known	as	Ilāvartavarṣa.	The	Emperor,	at	an	early	age,	retired	for	spiritual
perfection	but	failed	to	achieve	success.	In	his	next	life	he	took	birth	in	the
family	of	a	good	
brāhmaṇa	
and	was	known	as	Jaḍabharata	because	he	always
remained	secluded	and	did	not	talk	to	anyone.	And	later	on,	he	was	discovered
as	the	greatest	transcendentalist	by	King	Rahūgaṇa.	From	his	life	it	is
understood	that	transcendental	endeavors,	or	the	practice	of	
yoga
,	never	go	in
vain.	By	the	grace	of	the	Lord	the	transcendentalist	gets	repeated	opportunities
for	complete	perfection	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.TEXT	44
प ू व ा ᆼ ᇷ य ा स े न
	
त े न ै व
	
ि ह ् र य त े
	
ቋ व श ो ऽ ि प
	
स ः
	
।
ि ज ᇥ ा स ु र ि प
	
य ो ग ᇿ य
	
श ᇶ द ब ् र ቊ ा ि त व त ᆼ त े
	
॥
४ ४
॥
pūrvābhyāsena	tenaiva
hriyate	hy	avaśo	'pi	saḥ
jijñāsur	api	yogasya
śabda-brahmātivartate
pūrva—
previous;	
abhyāsena—
practice;	
tena—
by	the	influence	of	that;	
eva
—certainly;	
hriyate
—is	attracted;	
hi—
surely;	
avaśaḥ
—helpless;	
api—
also;
saḥ	
—he;	
jijñāsuḥ—
willing	to	know;	
api—
so;
	yogasya—
of	
yoga;	śabda-
brahma—	
ritualistic	principles	of	scripture;	
ativartate
—transcends.
TRANSLATION
By	virtue	of	the	divine	consciousness	of	his	previous	life,	he
automatically	becomes	attracted	to	the	yogic	principles—even	without
seeking	them.	Such	an	inquisitive	transcendentalist,	striving	for	yoga,
stands	always	above	the	ritualistic	principles	of	the	scriptures.
PURPORT
Advanced	
yogīs	
are	not	very	much	attracted	to	the	rituals	of	the	scriptures,
but	they	automatically	become	attracted	to	the	
yoga	
principles,	which	can
elevate	them	to	complete	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	the	highest	
yoga	
perfection.	In
the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
(3.33.8),	such	disregard	of	Vedic	rituals	by	the
advanced	transcendentalists	is	explained	as	follows:
aho	bata	śvapaco	'to	garīyān
yajjihvāgre	vartate	nāma	tubhyam
tepus	tapas	te	juhuvuḥ	sasnur	āryā
brahmānūcur	nāma	gṛṇanti	ye	te.
"O	my	Lord!	Persons	who	chant	the	holy	names	of	Your	Lordship	are	far,	far
advanced	in	spiritual	life,	even	if	born	in	families	of	dog-eaters.	Such	chantershave	undoubtedly	performed	all	kinds	of	austerities	and	sacrifices,	bathed	in
all	sacred	places,	and	finished	all	scriptural	studies."
The	famous	example	of	this	was	presented	by	Lord	Caitanya,	who	accepted
Ṭhākur	Haridāsa	as	one	of	His	most	important	disciples.	Although	Ṭhākur
Haridāsa	happened	to	take	his	birth	in	a	Moslem	family,	he	was	elevated	to	the
post	of	
nāmācārya
	by	Lord	Caitanya	due	to	his	rigidly	attended	principle	of
chanting	three	hundred	thousand	holy	names	of	the	Lord	daily:	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,
Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/	Hare	Rāma,	Hare	Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,
Hare	Hare.	And	because	he	chanted	the	holy	name	of	the	Lord	constantly,	it	is
understood	that	in	his	previous	life	he	must	have	passed	through	all	the
ritualistic	methods	of	the	
Vedas,	
known	as	
śabda-brahman.	
Unless,	therefore,
one	is	purified,	one	cannot	take	to	the	principle	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	nor
become	engaged	in	chanting	the	holy	name	of	the	Lord,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	45
प ् र य ᇰ न ा ሱ त म ा न ᇿ त ु
	
य ो ग ी
	
स ं श ु ሬ ि क ि ᇺ ब ष ः
	
।
अ न े क ज ᇳ म स ं ि स ሬ ᇿ त त ो
	
य ा ि त
	
प र ा ं
	
ग ि त म ्
	
॥
४ ५
॥
prayatnād	yatamānas	tu
yogī	saṁśuddha-kilbiṣaḥ
aneka-janma-saṁsiddhas
tato	yāti	parāṁ	gatim
prayatnāt—
by	rigid	practice;	
yatamānaḥ—
one	who	endeavors;	
tu—
but;
yogī
—such	a	transcendentalist;	
saṁśuddha
—washed	off;	
kilbiṣaḥ—
all	kinds
of	sins;	
aneka—
many,	many;	
janma
—births;	
saṁsiddhaḥ—
so	achieved
perfection;	
tataḥ
—thereafter;	
yāti
—attains;	
parām
—highest;	
gatim
—
destination.
TRANSLATION
But	when	the	yogī	engages	himself	with	sincere	endeavor	in	making
further	progress,	being	washed	of	all	contaminations,	then	ultimately,
after	many,	many	births	of	practice,	he	attains	the	supreme	goal.PURPORT
A	person	born	in	a	particularly	righteous,	aristocratic	or	sacred	family
becomes	conscious	of	his	favorable	condition	for	executing	
yoga	
practice.
With	determination,	therefore,	he	begins	his	unfinished	task,	and	thus	he
completely	cleanses	himself	of	all	material	contaminations.	When	he	is	finally
free	from	all	contaminations,	he	attains	the	supreme	perfection
—
Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	the	perfect	stage	of	being	freed	of	all
contaminations.	This	is	confirmed	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā:
yeṣāṁ	tvanta-gataṁ	pāpaṁ	janānāṁ	puṇya-karmaṇām
te	dvandva-moha-nirmuktā	bhajante	māṁ	dṛḍha-vratāḥ
"After	many,	many	births	of	executing	pious	activities,	when	one	is
completely	freed	from	all	contaminations,	and	from	all	illusory	dualities,	one
then	becomes	engaged	in	the	transcendental	loving	service	of	the	Lord."
TEXT	46
त प ि ᇿ व ᇷ य ो ऽ ि ध क ो
	
य ो ग ी
	
ᇥ ा ि न ᇷ य ो ऽ ि प
	
म त ो ऽ ि ध क ः
	
।
क ि म ᆼ ᇷ य ᇽ च ा ि ध क ो
	
य ो ग ी
	
त ᇿ म ा ሱ ो ग ी
	
भ व ा ज ु ᆼ न
	
॥
४ ६
॥
tapasvibhyo	'dhiko	yogī
jñānibhyo	'pi	mato	'dhikaḥ
karmibhyaś	cādhiko	yogī
tasmād	yogī	bhavārjuna
tapasvibhyaḥ—
than	the	ascetic;	
adhikaḥ—
greater;	
yogī—
the	
yogī
;
jñānibhyaḥ—
than	the	wise;	
api—
also;	
mataḥ—
considered;	
adhikaḥ
—greater
than;	
karmibhyaḥ—
than	the	fruitive	worker;	
ca—
also;	
adhikaḥ—
greater	than;
yogī
—the	
yogī
;	
tasmāt—
therefore;	
yogī—
a	transcendentalist;	
bhava—
just
become;	
arjuna
—O	Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
A	yogī	is	greater	than	the	ascetic,	greater	than	the	empiricist	andgreater	than	the	fruitive	worker.	Therefore,	O	Arjuna,	in	all
circumstances,	be	a	yogī.
PURPORT
When	we	speak	of	
yoga	
we	refer	to	linking	up	our	consciousness	with	the
Supreme	Absolute	Truth.	Such	a	process	is	named	differently	by	various
practitioners	in	terms	of	the	particular	method	adopted.	When	the	linking	up
process	is	predominantly	in	fruitive	activities,	it	is	called	
karma-yoga,	
when	it
is	predominantly	empirical,	it	is	called	
jñāna-yoga,	
and	when	it	is
predominantly	in	a	devotional	relationship	with	the	Supreme	Lord,	it	is	called
bhakti-yoga.	Bhakti-yoga	
or	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	the	ultimate	perfection	of
all	
yogas,	
as	will	be	explained	in	the	next	verse.	The	Lord	has	confirmed
herein	the	superiority	of	
yoga,	
but	He	has	not	mentioned	that	it	is	better	than
bhakti-yoga.	Bhakti-yoga
	is	full	spiritual	knowledge,	and	as	such,	nothing	can
excel	it.	Asceticism	without	self-knowledge	is	imperfect.	Empiric	knowledge
without	surrender	to	the	Supreme	Lord	is	also	imperfect.	And	fruitive	work
without	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	a	waste	of	time.	Therefore,	the	most	highly
praised	form	of	
yoga	
performance	mentioned	here	is	
bhakti-yoga,	
and	this	is
still	more	clearly	explained	in	the	next	verse.
TEXT	47
य ो ि ग न ा म ि प
	
स व ᆹ ष ा ं
	
म द ् ग त े न ा ᇳ त र ा ᇰ म न ा
	
।
श ् र ሬ ा व ा ᇳ भ ज त े
	
य ो
	
म ा ं
	
स
	
म े
	
य ु ᇧ त त म ो
	
म त ः
	
॥
४ ७
॥
yoginām	api	sarveṣāṁ
mad-gatenāntarātmanā
śraddhāvān	bhajate	yo	māṁ
sa	me	yuktatamo	mataḥ
yoginām—
of	all	
yogīs;	api—
also;
	sarveṣām—
all	types	of;	
mat-gatena—
abiding	in	Me;	
antaḥ-ātmanā—
always	thinking	of	Me	within;	
śraddhāvān—
in
full	faith;	
bhajate—
renders	transcendental	loving	service;	
yaḥ
—one	who;
mām—
Me	(the	Supreme	Lord);	
saḥ—
he;	
me—
Mine;	
yuktatamaḥ—
the	greatest
yogī
;	
mataḥ
—is	considered.TRANSLATION
And	of	all	yogīs,	he	who	always	abides	in	Me	with	great	faith,
worshiping	Me	in	transcendental	loving	service,	is	most	intimately	united
with	Me	in	yoga	and	is	the	highest	of	all.
PURPORT
The	word	
bhajete	
is	significant	here.	
Bhajete	
has	its	root	in	the	verb	
bhaj,
which	is	used	when	there	is	need	of	service.	The	English	word	"worship"
cannot	be	used	in	the	same	sense	as	
bhaja.	
Worship	means	to	adore,	or	to
show	respect	and	honor	to	the	worthy	one.	But	service	with	love	and	faith	is
especially	meant	for	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	One	can	avoid
worshiping	a	respectable	man	or	a	demigod	and	may	be	called	discourteous,
but	one	cannot	avoid	serving	the	Supreme	Lord	without	being	thoroughly
condemned.	Every	living	entity	is	part	and	parcel	of	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead,	and	thus	every	living	entity	is	intended	to	serve	the	Supreme
Lord	by	his	own	constitution.	Failing	to	do	this,	he	falls	down.	The
Bhāgavatam	
confirms	this	as	follows:
ya	eṣāṁ	puruṣaṁ	sākṣād	ātma-prabhavam	īśvaram
na	bhajanty	avajānanti	sthānād	bhraṣṭā	patanty	adhaḥ.
"Anyone	who	does	not	render	service	and	neglects	his	duty	unto	the	Primeval
Lord,	who	is	the	source	of	all	living	entities,	will	certainly	fall	down	from	his
constitutional	position."
In	this	verse	also	the	word	
bhajanti
	is	used.	Therefore,	
bhajanti	
is
applicable	to	the	Supreme	Lord	only,	whereas	the	word	"worship"	can	be
applied	to	demigods	or	to	any	other	common	living	entity.	The	word
avajānanti,	
used	in	this	verse	of	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
	is	also	found	in	the
Bhagavad-gītā:	avajānanti	māṁ	mūḍhāḥ:	
"Only	the	fools	and	rascals	deride
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	Lord	Kṛṣṇa."	Such	fools	take	it	upon
themselves	to	write	commentaries	on	the	
Bhagavad-gītā	
without	an	attitude	of
service	to	the	Lord.	Consequently	they	cannot	properly	distinguish	between
the	word	
bhajanti	
and	the	word	"worship."
The	culmination	of	all	kinds	of	
yoga	
practices	lies	in	
bhakti-yoga.	
All	other
yogas	
are	but	means	to	come	to	the	point	of	
bhakti	
in	
bhakti-yoga.	Yoga
actually	means	
bhakti-yoga;	
all	other	
yogas	
are	progressions	toward	thedestination	of	
bhakti-yoga.	
From	the	beginning	of	
karma-yoga	
to	the	end	of
bhakti-yoga
	is	a	long	way	to	self-realization.	
Karma-yoga,	
without	fruitive
results,	is	the	beginning	of	this	path.	When	
karma-yoga	
increases	in
knowledge	and	renunciation,	the	stage	is	called	
jñāna-yoga.	
When	
jñāna-yoga
increases	in	meditation	on	the	Supersoul	by	different	physical	processes,	and
the	mind	is	on	Him,	it	is	called	
aṣṭāṅga-yoga
.	And,	when	one	surpasses	the
aṣṭāṅga-yoga	
and	comes	to	the	point	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead
Kṛṣṇa,	it	is	called	
bhakti-yoga,	
the	culmination.	Factually,	
bhakti-yoga
	is	the
ultimate	goal,	but	to	analyze	
bhakti-yoga	
minutely	one	has	to	understand	these
other	
yogas.	
The	
yogī	
who	is	progressive	is	therefore	on	the	true	path	of
eternal	good	fortune.	One	who	sticks	to	a	particular	point	and	does	not	make
further	progress	is	called	by	that	particular	name:	
karma-yogī,	jñāna-yogī	
or
dhyāna-yogī,	rāja-yogī,	haṭha-yogī,	
etc.	If	one	is	fortunate	enough	to	come	to
the	point	of	
bhakti-yoga,	
it	is	to	be	understood	that	he	has	surpassed	all	the
other	
yogas.	
Therefore,	to	become	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	is	the	highest	stage	of
yoga,	
just	as,	when	we	speak	of	Himalayan,	we	refer	to	the	world's	highest
mountains,	of	which	the	highest	peak,	Mount	Everest,	is	considered	to	be	the
culmination.
It	is	by	great	fortune	that	one	comes	to	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	on	the	path	of
bhakti-yoga	
to	become	well	situated	according	to	the	Vedic	direction.	The
ideal	
yogī	
concentrates	his	attention	on	Kṛṣṇa,	who	is	called	Śyāmasundara,
who	is	as	beautifully	colored	as	a	cloud,	whose	lotus-like	face	is	as	effulgent
as	the	sun,	whose	dress	is	brilliant	with	jewels	and	whose	body	is	flower
garlanded.	Illuminating	all	sides	is	His	gorgeous	luster,	which	is	called	the
brahmajyoti.	
He	incarnates	in	different	forms	such	as	Rāma,	Nṛsiṁha,	Varāha
and	Kṛṣṇa,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	and	He	descends	like	a
human	being,	as	the	son	of	Mother	Yaśodā,	and	He	is	known	as	Kṛṣṇa,
Govinda	and	Vāsudeva.	He	is	the	perfect	child,	husband,	friend	and	master,
and	He	is	full	with	all	opulences	and	transcendental	qualities.	If	one	remains
fully	conscious	of	these	features	of	the	Lord,	he	is	called	the	highest	
yogī.
This	stage	of	highest	perfection	in	
yoga	
can	be	attained	only	by	
bhakti-
yoga,	
as	is	confirmed	in	all	Vedic	literature:
yasya	deve	parā	bhaktir	yathā	deve	tathā	gurau.
tasyaite	kathitā	hy	arthāḥ	prakāśante	mahātmanaḥ.
"Only	unto	those	great	souls	who	have	implicit	faith	in	both	the	Lord	and
the	spiritual	master	are	all	the	imports	of	Vedic	knowledge	automaticallyrevealed."
Bhaktir	asya	bhajanaṁ	tadihāmutropādhi	nairāsyenāmuṣmin	manaḥ
kalpanam;	etad	eva	naiṣkarmyam.	"Bhakti	
means	devotional	service	to	the
Lord	which	is	free	from	desire	for	material	profit,	either	in	this	life	or	in	the
next.	Devoid	of	such	inclinations,	one	should	fully	absorb	the	mind	in	the
Supreme.	That	is	the	purpose	of	
naiṣkarmya
."
These	are	some	of	the	means	for	performance	of	
bhakti	
or	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	the	highest	perfectional	stage	of	the	
yoga	
system.
Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	Sixth	Chapter	of	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhagavad-gītā
	in	the	matter	of
	Sāṅkhya-yoga	Brahma-vidyā.Chapter-7
CHAPTER	SEVEN
Knowledge	of	the	Absolute
TEXT	1
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
म ᇹ य ा स ᇧ त म न ा ः
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
य ो ग ं
	
य ु ᇮ ज ᇳ म द ा श ् र य ः
	
।
अ स ं श य ं
	
स म ग ् र ं
	
म ा ं
	
य थ ा
	
ᇥ ा ᇿ य ि स
	
त ᇫ छ ृ ण ु
	
॥
१
॥
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
mayy	āsakta-manāḥ	pārtha
yogaṁ	yuñjan	mad-āśrayaḥ
asaṁśayaṁ	samagraṁ	māṁyathā	jñāsyasi	tac	chṛṇu
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Lord	said;	
mayi
—unto	Me;	
āsakta-
manāḥ	—
mind	attached;	
pārtha
—O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
yogam
—self-realization;
yuñjan
—	so	practicing;	
mat-āśrayaḥ—
in	consciousness	of	Me	(Kṛṣṇa
consciousness);	
asaṁśayam
—without	doubt;	
samagram
—completely;	
mām
—
unto	Me;	
yathā	—
as	much	as;	
jñāsyasi
—you	can	know;	
tat
—that;	
śṛṇu
—try
to	hear.
TRANSLATION
Now	hear,	O	son	of	Pṛthā	[Arjuna],	how	by	practicing	yoga	in	full
consciousness	of	Me,	with	mind	attached	to	Me,	you	can	know	Me	in	full,
free	from	doubt.
PURPORT
In	this	Seventh	Chapter	of	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
the	nature	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	fully	described.	Kṛṣṇa	is	full	in	all	opulences,	and	how	He
manifests	such	opulences	is	described	herein.	Also,	four	kinds	of	fortunate
people	who	become	attached	to	Kṛṣṇa,	and	four	kinds	of	unfortunate	people
who	never	take	to	Kṛṣṇa	are	described	in	this	chapter.
In	the	first	six	chapters	of	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
the	living	entity	has	been
described	as	nonmaterial	spirit	soul	which	is	capable	of	elevating	himself	to
self-realization	by	different	types	of	
yogas.	
At	the	end	of	the	Sixth	Chapter,	it
has	been	clearly	stated	that	the	steady	concentration	of	the	mind	upon	Kṛṣṇa,
or	in	other	words	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	is	the	highest	form	of	all	
yoga.
	By
concentrating	one's	mind	upon	Kṛṣṇa,	one	is	able	to	know	the	Absolute	Truth
completely,	but	not	otherwise.	Impersonal	
brahmajyoti	
or	localized
Paramātmā	realization	is	not	perfect	knowledge	of	the	Absolute	Truth	because
it	is	partial.	Full	and	scientific	knowledge	is	Kṛṣṇa,	and	everything	is	revealed
to	the	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	In	complete	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	one
knows	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	ultimate	knowledge	beyond	any	doubts.	Different	types	of
yoga	
are	only	steppingstones	on	the	path	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	One	who
takes	directly	to	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	automatically	knows	about	
brahmajyoti
and	Paramātmā	in	full.	By	practice	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	
yoga,	
one	can
know	everything	in	full—namely	the	Absolute	Truth,	the	living	entities,	thematerial	nature,	and	their	manifestations	with	paraphernalia.
One	should	therefore	begin	
yoga	
practice	as	directed	in	the	last	verse	of	the
Sixth	Chapter.	Concentration	of	the	mind	upon	Kṛṣṇa	the	Supreme	is	made
possible	by	prescribed	devotional	service	in	nine	different	forms,	of	which
śravaṇam
	is	the	first	and	most	important.	The	Lord	therefore	says	to	Arjuna,
"
tat	śṛṇu
,"	or	"Hear	from	Me."	No	one	can	be	a	greater	authority	than	Kṛṣṇa,
and	therefore	by	hearing	from	Him	one	receives	the	greatest	opportunity	for
progress	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	One	has	therefore	to	learn	from	Kṛṣṇa
directly	or	from	a	pure	devotee	of	Kṛṣṇa—and	not	from	a	nondevotee	upstart,
puffed	up	with	academic	education.
In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
this	process	of	understanding	Kṛṣṇa,	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	the	Absolute	Truth,	is	described	in	the
Second	Chapter	of	the	First	Canto	as	follows:
śṛṇvatāṁ	sva-kathāṁ	kṛṣṇaḥ	puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ
hṛdyantaḥstho	hy	abhadrāṇi	vidbunoti	suhṛt	satām.
naṣṭa-prāyeṣv	abhadreṣu	nityaṁ	bhāgavata-sevayā
bhagavaty	uttama-śloke	bhaktir	bhavati	naiṣṭhikī.
tadā	rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ	kāma-lobhadayaś	ca	ye
ceta	etair	anāviddhaṁ	sthitaṁ	sattve	prasīdati.
evam	prasanna-manaso	bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ
bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ	mukta-saṅgasya	jāyate.
bhidyate	hṛdaya-granthiś	chidyante	sarva-saṁśayāḥ
kṣīyante	cāsya	karmāṇi	dṛṣṭa	evātmanīśvare.
"To	hear	about	Kṛṣṇa	from	Vedic	literatures,	or	to	hear	from	Him	directly
through	the	
Bhagavad-gītā,
	is	itself	righteous	activity.	And	for	one	who	hears
about	Kṛṣṇa,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	who	is	dwelling	in	everyone's	heart,	acts	as	a	best-
wishing	friend	and	purifies	the	devotee	who	constantly	engages	in	hearing	of
Him.	In	this	way,	a	devotee	naturally	develops	his	dormant	transcendental
knowledge.	As	he	hears	more	about	Kṛṣṇa	from	the	
Bhāgavatam	
and	from	the
devotees,	he	becomes	fixed	in	the	devotional	service	of	the	Lord.	By
development	of	devotional	service	one	becomes	freed	from	the	modes	of
passion	and	ignorance,	and	thus	material	lusts	and	avarice	are	diminished.
When	these	impurities	are	wiped	away,	the	candidate	remains	steady	in	hisposition	of	pure	goodness,	becomes	enlivened	by	devotional	service	and
understands	the	science	of	God	perfectly.	Thus	
bhakti-yoga	
severs	the	hard
knot	of	material	affection	and	enables	one	to	come	at	once	to	the	stage	of
'
asaṁśayaṁ	samagram,
'understanding	of	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth
Personality	of	Godhead."	
(Bhāg.	
1.2.17-21)
Therefore	only	by	hearing	from	Kṛṣṇa	or	from	His	devotee	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	can	one	understand	the	science	of	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	2
ᇥ ा न ं
	
त े ऽ ह ं
	
स ि व ᇥ ा न ि म द ं
	
व ቎ य ा ᇸ य श े ष त ः
	
।
य ᇬ ᇥ ा ᇰ व ा
	
न े ह
	
भ ू य ो ऽ ᇳ य ᇬ ᇥ ा त ᇼ य म व ि श ᇾ य त े
	
॥
२
॥
jñānaṁ	te	'haṁ	sa-vijñānam
idaṁ	vakṣyāmy	aśeṣataḥ
yaj	jñātvā	neha	bhūyo	'nyaj
jñātavyam	avaśiṣyate
jñānam
—phenomenal	knowledge;	
te
—unto	you;	
aham
—I;	
sa
—with;
vijñānam
—noumenal	knowledge;	
idam
—this;	
vakṣyāmi
—shall	explain;
aśeṣataḥ
—in	full;	
yat
—which;	
jñātvā
—knowing;	
na
—not;	
iha
—in	this
world;	
bhūyaḥ—
further;	
anyat
—anything	more;	
jñātavyam
—knowable;
avaśiṣyate
—	remains	to	be	known.
TRANSLATION
I	shall	now	declare	unto	you	in	full	this	knowledge	both	phenomenal
and	noumenal,	by	knowing	which	there	shall	remain	nothing	further	to
be	known.
PURPORT
Complete	knowledge	includes	knowledge	of	the	phenomenal	world	and	the
spirit	behind	it.	The	source	of	both	of	them	is	transcendental	knowledge.	The
Lord	wants	to	explain	the	above-mentioned	system	of	knowledge	because
Arjuna	is	Kṛṣṇa's	confidential	devotee	and	friend.	In	the	beginning	of	theFourth	Chapter	this	explanation	was	given	by	the	Lord,	and	it	is	again
confirmed	here:	complete	knowledge	can	be	achieved	only	by	the	devotee	of
the	Lord	directly	from	the	Lord	in	disciplic	succession.	Therefore	one	should
be	intelligent	enough	to	know	the	source	of	all	knowledge,	who	is	the	cause	of
all	causes	and	the	only	object	for	meditation	in	all	types	of	
yoga
	practices.
When	the	cause	of	all	causes	becomes	known,	then	everything	knowable
becomes	known,	and	nothing	remains	unknown.	The	
Vedas	
say,	"
yasmin
vijñate	sarvam	eva	vijñatam
	
bhavanti
."
TEXT	3
म न ु ᇾ य ा ण ा ं
	
स ह स ् र े ष ु
	
क ि ᇽ च ሱ त ि त
	
ि स ሬ य े
	
।
य त त ा म ि प
	
ि स ሬ ा न ा ं
	
क ि ᇽ च ᇳ म ा ं
	
व े ि ሧ
	
त ᇰ ᇰ व त ः
	
॥
३
॥
manuṣyāṇāṁ	sahasreṣu
kaścid	yatati	siddhaye
yatatām	api	siddhānāṁ
kaścin	māṁ	vetti	tattvataḥPictures	Part	2
manuṣyāṇām—
of	men;	
sahasreṣu—
out	of	many	thousands;	
kaścit
—
someone;	
yatati—
endeavors;	
siddhaye—
for	perfection;	
yatatām—
of	those
so	endeavoring;	
api—
indeed;	
siddhānām—
of	those	who	have	achieved
perfection;	
kaścit—
someone;	
mām—
Me;	
vetti—
does	know;	
tattvataḥ—
in	fact.
TRANSLATION
Out	of	many	thousands	among	men,	one	may	endeavor	for	perfection,
and	of	those	who	have	achieved	perfection,	hardly	one	knows	Me	in	truth.
PURPORT
There	are	various	grades	of	men,	and	out	of	many	thousands	one	may	be
sufficiently	interested	in	transcendental	realization	to	try	to	know	what	is	the
self,	what	is	the	body,	and	what	is	the	Absolute	Truth.	Generally	mankind	is
simply	engaged	in	the	animal	propensities,	namely	eating,	sleeping,	defending
and	mating,	and	hardly	anyone	is	interested	in	transcendental	knowledge.	The
first	six	chapters	of	the	
Gītā
	are	meant	for	those	who	are	interested	in
transcendental	knowledge,	in	understanding	the	self,	the	Superself	and	the
process	of	realization	by	
jñāna-yoga,	dhyāna-yoga,	
and	discrimination	of	the
self	from	matter.	However,	Kṛṣṇa	can	only	be	known	by	persons	who	are	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Other	transcendentalists	may	achieve	impersonal
Brahman	realization,	for	this	is	easier	than	understanding	Kṛṣṇa.	Kṛṣṇa	is	the
Supreme	Person,	but	at	the	same	time	He	is	beyond	the	knowledge	of
Brahman	and	Paramātmā.	The	
yogīs	
and	
jñānīs	
are	confused	in	their	attempts
to	understand	Kṛṣṇa,	although	the	greatest	of	the	impersonalists,	Śrīpāda
Śaṅkarācārya,	has	admitted	in	his	
Gītā
	commentary	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.	But	his	followers	do	not	accept	Kṛṣṇa	as	such,	for	it
is	very	difficult	to	know	Kṛṣṇa,	even	though	one	has	transcendental	realization
of	impersonal	Brahman.
Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	the	cause	of	all	causes,	the
primeval	Lord	Govinda.	
Īśvaraḥ	paramaḥ	kṛṣṇaḥ	sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ
anādir	ādir	govindaḥ	sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam.	
It	is	very	difficult	for	the
nondevotees	to	know	Him.	Although	nondevotees	declare	that	the	path	of
bhakti	
or	devotional	service	is	very	easy,	they	cannot	practice	it.	If	the	path	of
bhakti	
is	so	easy,	as	the	nondevotee	class	of	men	proclaim,	then	why	do	theytake	up	the	difficult	path?	Actually	the	path	of	
bhakti
	is	not	easy.	The	so-
called	path	of	
bhakti	
practiced	by	unauthorized	persons	without	knowledge	of
bhakti	
may	be	easy,	but	when	it	is	practiced	factually	according	to	the	rules
and	regulations,	the	speculative	scholars	and	philosophers	fall	away	from	the
path.	Śrīla	Rūpa	Gosvāmī	writes	in	his	
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu:
śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-pañcarātra-vidhiṁ	vinā
aikāntikī	harer	bhaktir	utpātāyaiva	kalpate.
"Devotional	service	of	the	Lord	that	ignores	the	authorized	Vedic	literatures
like	the	
Upaniṣads,	Purāṇas,	Nārada-pañcarātra,	
etc.,	is	simply	an
unnecessary	disturbance	in	society."
It	is	not	possible	for	the	Brahman	realized	impersonalist	or	the	Paramātmā
realized	
yogī
	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	as	the
son	of	mother	Yaśodā	or	the	charioteer	of	Arjuna.	Even	the	great	demigods	are
sometimes	confused	about	Kṛṣṇa:	"
muhyanti	yat	sūrayaḥ
,"	"
māṁ	tu	veda	na
kaścana
."	"No	one	knows	Me	as	I	am,"	the	Lord	says.	And	if	one	does	know
Him,	then	"
sa	mahātmā	sudurlabhaḥ
."	"Such	a	great	soul	is	very	rare."
Therefore	unless	one	practices	devotional	service	to	the	Lord,	he	cannot	know
Kṛṣṇa	as	He	is	
(tattvataḥ),	
even	though	one	is	a	great	scholar	or	philosopher.
Only	the	pure	devotees	can	know	something	of	the	inconceivable
transcendental	qualities	in	Kṛṣṇa,	in	the	cause	of	all	causes,	in	His
omnipotence	and	opulence,	and	in	His	wealth,	fame,	strength,	beauty,
knowledge	and	renunciation,	because	Kṛṣṇa	is	benevolently	inclined	to	His
devotees.	He	is	the	last	word	in	Brahman	realization,	and	the	devotees	alone
can	realize	Him	as	He	is.	Therefore	it	is	said:
ataḥ	śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi	na	bhaved	grāhyam	indriyaiḥ
sevonmukhe	hi	jihvādau	svayam	eva	sphuraty	adaḥ
"No	one	can	understand	Kṛṣṇa	as	He	is	by	the	blunt	material	senses.	But	He
reveals	Himself	to	the	devotees,	being	pleased	with	them	for	their
transcendental	loving	service	unto	Him."	
(Padma	Purāṇa)
TEXT	4
भ ू ि म र ा प ो ऽ न ल ो
	
व ा य ु ः
	
ख ं
	
म न ो
	
ब ु द ् ि ध र े व
	
च
	
।
अ ह ं क ा र
	
इ त ी य ं
	
म े
	
ि भ ᇳ न ा
	
प ् र क ृ ि त र ᇾ ट ध ा
	
॥
४
॥bhūmir	āpo	'nalo	vāyuḥ
khaṁ	mano	buddhir	eva	ca
ahaṅkāra	itīyaṁ	me
bhinnā	prakṛtir	aṣṭadhā
bhūmiḥ—
earth;	
āpaḥ—
water;	
analaḥ—
fire;	
vāyuḥ
—air;	
kham—
ether;
manaḥ—
mind;	
buddhiḥ—
intelligence;	
eva—
certainly;	
ca—
and;	
ahaṅkāraḥ—
false	ego;	
iti—
thus;	
iyam—
all	these;	
me—
My;
	bhinnā—
separated;	
prakṛtiḥ	
—
energies;	
aṣṭadhā
—total	eight.
TRANSLATION
Earth,	water,	fire,	air,	ether,	mind,	intelligence	and	false	ego—
altogether	these	eight	comprise	My	separated	material	energies.
PURPORT
The	science	of	God	analyzes	the	constitutional	position	of	God	and	His
diverse	energies.	Material	nature	is	called	
prakṛti,	
or	the	energy	of	the	Lord	in
His	different	
puruṣa	
incarnations	(expansions)	as	described	in	the	
Svatvata
Tantra:
viṣṇos	tu	trīṇi	rūpāṇi	puruṣākhyāny	atho	viduḥ
ekantu	mahataḥ	sraṣṭṛ	dvitīyaṁ	tv	aṇḍa-saṁsthitam
tṛtīyaṁ	sarvabhūta-sthaṁ	tāni	jñātvā	vimucyate
"For	material	creation,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa's	plenary	expansion	assumes	three	Viṣṇus.
The	first	one,	Mahā-Viṣṇu,	creates	the	total	material	energy,	known	as	
mahat-
tattva.	
The	second,	Garbhodakaśāyī	Viṣṇu,	enters	into	all	the	universes	to
create	diversities	in	each	of	them.	The	third,	Kṣīrodakaśāyī	Viṣṇu,	is	diffused
as	the	all-pervading	Supersoul	in	all	the	universes	and	is	known	as
Paramātmā,	who	is	present	even	within	the	atoms.	Anyone	who	knows	these
three	Viṣṇus	can	be	liberated	from	material	entanglement."
This	material	world	is	a	temporary	manifestation	of	one	of	the	energies	of
the	Lord.	All	the	activities	of	the	material	world	are	directed	by	these	three
Viṣṇu	expansions	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.	These	
Puruṣas	
are	called	incarnations.
Generally	one	who	does	not	know	the	science	of	God	(Kṛṣṇa)	assumes	thatthis	material	world	is	for	the	enjoyment	of	the	living	entities	and	that	the
living	entities	are	the	causes	
(Puruṣas),	
controllers	and	enjoyers	of	the
material	energy.	According	to	
Bhagavad-gītā	
this	atheistic	conclusion	is	false.
In	the	verse	under	discussion	it	is	stated	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	original	cause	of	the
material	manifestation.	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
also	confirms	this.	The
ingredients	of	the	material	manifestation	are	separated	energies	of	the	Lord.
Even	the	
brahmajyoti,	
which	is	the	ultimate	goal	of	the	impersonalists,	is	a
spiritual	energy	manifested	in	the	spiritual	sky.	There	are	no	spiritual
diversities	in	
brahmajyoti	
as	there	are	in	the	Vaikuṇṭhalokas,	and	the
impersonalist	accepts	this	
brahmajyoti	
as	the	ultimate	eternal	goal.	The
Paramātmā	manifestation	is	also	a	temporary	all-pervasive	aspect	of	the
Kṣīrodakaśāyī	Viṣṇu.	The	Paramātmā	manifestation	is	not	eternal	in	the
spiritual	world.	Therefore	the	factual	Absolute	Truth	is	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead	Kṛṣṇa.	He	is	the	complete	energetic	person,	and	He
possesses	different	separated	and	internal	energies.
In	the	material	energy,	the	principal	manifestations	are	eight,	as	above
mentioned.	Out	of	these,	the	first	five	manifestations,	namely	earth,	water,
fire,	air	and	sky,	are	called	the	five	gigantic	creations	or	the	gross	creations,
within	which	the	five	sense	objects	are	included.	They	are	the	manifestations
of	physical	sound,	touch,	form,	taste	and	smell.	Material	science	comprises
these	ten	items	and	nothing	more.	But	the	other	three	items,	namely	mind,
intelligence	and	false	ego,	are	neglected	by	the	materialists.	Philosophers	who
deal	with	mental	activities	are	also	not	perfect	in	knowledge	because	they	do
not	know	the	ultimate	source,	Kṛṣṇa.	The	false	ego—"I	am,"	and	"It	is	mine,"
which	constitute	the	basic	principle	of	material	existence-includes	ten	sense
organs	for	material	activities.	Intelligence	refers	to	the	total	material	creation,
called	the	
mahat-tattva.	
Therefore	from	the	eight	separated	energies	of	the
Lord	are	manifest	the	twenty-four	elements	of	the	material	world,	which	are
the	subject	matter	of	
sāṅkhya	
atheistic	philosophy;	they	are	originally
offshoots	from	Kṛṣṇa's	energies	and	are	separated	from	Him,	but	atheistic
sāṅkhya	
philosophers	with	a	poor	fund	of	knowledge	do	not	know	Kṛṣṇa	as
the	cause	of	all	causes.	The	subject	matter	for	discussion	in	the	
sāṅkhya
philosophy	is	only	the	manifestation	of	the	external	energy	of	Kṛṣṇa,	as	it	is
described	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā.
TEXT	5
अ प र े य ि म त ᇿ ᇰ व ᇳ य ा ं
	
प ् र क ृ ि त ं
	
ि व द ् ि ध
	
म े
	
प र ा म ्
	
।ज ी व भ ू त ा ं
	
म ह ा ब ा ह ो
	
य य े द ं
	
ध ा य ᆼ त े
	
ज ग त ्
	
॥
५
॥
apareyam	itas	tv	anyāṁ
prakṛtiṁ	viddhi	me	parām
jīva-bhūtāṁ	mahā-bāho
yayedaṁ	dhāryate	jagat
aparā—
inferior;	
iyam—
this;	
itaḥ—
besides	this;	
tu—
but;	
anyām—
another;
prakṛtim—
energy;	
viddhi—
just	try	to	understand;	
me—
My;
	parām—
superior;
jīva-bhūtām—
the	living	entities;	
mahā-bāho
—O	mighty-armed	one;	
yayā—
by
whom;	
idam—
this;	
dhāryate—
being	utilized	or	exploited;	
jagat—
the	material
world.
TRANSLATION
Besides	this	inferior	nature,	O	mighty-armed	Arjuna,	there	is	a
superior	energy	of	Mine,	which	are	all	living	entities	who	are	struggling
with	material	nature	and	are	sustaining	the	universe.
PURPORT
Here	it	is	clearly	mentioned	that	living	entities	belong	to	the	superior	nature
(or	energy)	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	The	inferior	energy	is	matter	manifested	in
different	elements,	namely	earth,	water,	fire,	air,	ether,	mind,	intelligence	and
false	ego.	Both	forms	of	material	nature,	namely	gross	(earth,	etc.)	and	subtle
(mind,	etc.),	are	products	of	the	inferior	energy.	The	living	entities,	who	are
exploiting	these	inferior	energies	for	different	purposes,	are	the	superior
energy	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	and	it	is	due	to	this	energy	that	the	entire
material	world	functions.	The	cosmic	manifestation	has	no	power	to	act	unless
it	is	moved	by	the	superior	energy,	the	living	entity.	Energies	are	always
controlled	by	the	energetic,	and	therefore	living	entities	are	always	controlled
by	the	Lord—they	have	no	independent	existence.	They	are	never	equally
powerful,	as	unintelligent	men	think.	The	distinction	between	the	living
entities	and	the	Lord	is	described	in	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
as	follows
(10.87.30):
aparimitā	dhruvās	tanubhṛto	yadi	sarva-gatāstarhiṁ	na	śāsyateti	niyamo	dhruva	netarathā
ajani	ca	yanmayaṁ	tad	avimucya	niyantṛ
bhavet	samam	anujānatāṁ	yad-amataṁ	mata-duṣṭatayā
"O	Supreme	Eternal!	If	the	embodied	living	entities	were	eternal	and	all-
pervading	like	You,	then	they	would	not	be	under	Your	control.	But	if	the
living	entities	are	accepted	as	minute	energies	of	Your	Lordship,	then	they	are
at	once	subject	to	Your	supreme	control.	Therefore	real	liberation	entails
surrender	by	the	living	entities	to	Your	control,	and	that	surrender	will	make
them	happy.	In	that	constitutional	position	only	can	they	be	controllers.
Therefore,	men	with	limited	knowledge	who	advocate	the	monistic	theory	that
God	and	the	living	entities	are	equal	in	all	respects	are	actually	misleading
themselves	and	others."
The	Supreme	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	only	controller,	and	all	living	entities	are
controlled	by	Him.	These	living	entities	are	His	superior	energy	because	the
quality	of	their	existence	is	one	and	the	same	with	the	Supreme,	but	they	are
never	equal	to	the	Lord	in	quantity	of	power.	While	exploiting	the	gross	and
subtle	inferior	energy	(matter),	the	superior	energy	(the	living	entity)	forgets
his	real	spiritual	mind	and	intelligence.	This	forgetfulness	is	due	to	the
influence	of	matter	upon	the	living	entity.	But	when	the	living	entity	becomes
free	from	the	influence	of	the	illusory	material	energy,	he	attains	the	stage
called	
mukti,
	or	liberation.	The	false	ego,	under	the	influence	of	material
illusion,	thinks,	"I	am	matter,	and	material	acquisitions	are	mine."	His	actual
position	is	realized	when	he	is	liberated	from	all	material	ideas,	including	the
conception	of	his	becoming	one	in	all	respects	with	God.	Therefore	one	may
conclude	that	the	
Gītā	
confirms	the	living	entity	to	be	only	one	of	the	multi-
energies	of	Kṛṣṇa;	and	when	this	energy	is	freed	from	material	contamination,
it	becomes	fully	Kṛṣṇa	conscious,	or	liberated.
TEXT	6
ए त ሱ ो न ी ि न
	
भ ू त ा ि न
	
स व ा ᆼ ण ी ᇰ य ु प ध ा र य
	
।
अ ह ं
	
क ृ ᇰ ᇿ न ᇿ य
	
ज ग त ः
	
प ् र भ व ः
	
प ् र ल य ᇿ त थ ा
	
॥
६
॥
etad	yonīni	bhūtāni
sarvāṇīty	upadhāraya
ahaṁ	kṛtsnasya	jagataḥ
prabhavaḥ	pralayas	tathāetat—
these	two	natures;	
yonīni—
source	of	birth;	
bhūtāni—
everything
created;	
sarvāṇi
—all;	
iti—
thus;	
upadhāraya—
know;	
aham—
I;
	kṛtsnasya—
all-inclusive;	
jagataḥ—
of	the	world;	
prabhavaḥ—
source	of	manifestation;
pralayaḥ—
annihilation;	
tathā—
as	well	as.
TRANSLATION
Of	all	that	is	material	and	all	that	is	spiritual	in	this	world,	know	for
certain	that	I	am	both	its	origin	and	dissolution.
PURPORT
Everything	that	exists	is	a	product	of	matter	and	spirit.	Spirit	is	the	basic
field	of	creation,	and	matter	is	created	by	spirit.	Spirit	is	not	created	at	a
certain	stage	of	material	development.	Rather,	this	material	world	is
manifested	only	on	the	basis	of	spiritual	energy.	This	material	body	is
developed	because	spirit	is	present	within	matter;	a	child	grows	gradually	to
boyhood	and	then	to	manhood	because	of	that	superior	energy,	spirit	soul,
being	present.	Similarly,	the	entire	cosmic	manifestation	of	the	gigantic
universe	is	developed	because	of	the	presence	of	the	Supersoul,	Viṣṇu.
Therefore	spirit	and	matter,	which	combine	together	to	manifest	this	gigantic
universal	form,	are	originally	two	energies	of	the	Lord,	and	consequently	the
Lord	is	the	original	cause	of	everything.	A	fragmental	part	and	parcel	of	the
Lord,	namely,	the	living	entity,	may	by	manipulation	of	material	energy
construct	a	skyscraper,	factory	or	city,	but	he	cannot	create	matter	out	of
nothing,	and	he	certainly	cannot	construct	a	planet	or	a	universe.	The	cause	of
the	universe	is	the	Supersoul,	Kṛṣṇa,	the	supreme	creator	of	all	individual
souls	and	the	original	cause	of	all	causes,	as	the	
Kaṭha	Upaniṣad	
confirms:
nityo	nityānāṁ	cetanaś	cetanānām.
TEXT	7
म ሧ ः
	
प र त र ं
	
न ा ᇳ य ि ᇰ क ि ᇮ च द ि ᇿ त
	
ध न ᇮ ज य
	
।
म ि य
	
स व ᆼ ि म द ं
	
प ् र ो त ं
	
स ू त ् र े
	
म ि ण ग ण ा
	
इ व
	
॥
७
॥
mattaḥ	parataraṁ	nānyatkiñcid	asti	dhanañjaya
mayi	sarvam	idaṁ	protaṁ
sūtre	maṇi-gaṇā	iva
mattaḥ—
beyond	Myself;	
parataram
—superior;	
na
—not;	
anyat
—anything
else;	
kiñcit—
something;	
asti
—there	is;	
dhanañjaya—
O	conquerer	of	wealth;
mayi
—in	Me;	
sarvam
—all	that	be;	
idam—
which	we	see;	
protam—
strung;
sūtre—
on	a	thread;	
maṇi-gaṇāḥ—
pearls;	
iva—
likened.
TRANSLATION
O	conquerer	of	wealth	[Arjuna],	there	is	no	Truth	superior	to	Me.
Everything	rests	upon	Me,	as	pearls	are	strung	on	a	thread.
PURPORT
There	is	a	common	controversy	over	whether	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth
is	personal	or	impersonal.	As	far	as	
Bhagavad-gītā
	is	concerned,	the	Absolute
Truth	is	the	Personality	of	Godhead	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa,	and	this	is	confirmed	in	every
step.	In	this	verse,	in	particular,	it	is	stressed	that	the	Absolute	Truth	is	a
person.	That	the	Personality	of	Godhead	is	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth	is	also
the	affirmation	of	the	
Brahma-saṁhitā:	īśvaraḥ	paramaḥ	kṛṣṇaḥ	sac-cid-
ānanda-vigrahaḥ;	
that	is,	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth	Personality	of	Godhead
is	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	who	is	the	primeval	Lord,	the	reservoir	of	all	pleasure,
Govinda,	and	the	eternal	form	of	complete	bliss	and	knowledge.	These
authorities	leave	no	doubt	that	the	Absolute	Truth	is	the	Supreme	Person,	the
cause	of	all	causes.	The	impersonalist,	however,	argues	on	the	strength	of	the
Vedic	version	given	in	the	
Śvetāśvatara	Upaniṣad:	tato	yad	uttarataraṁ	tad
arūpam	anāmayaṁ	ya	etad	vidur	amṛtās	te	bhavanti	athetare	duḥkham	evāpi
yanti.	
"In	the	material	world	Brahmā,	the	primeval	living	entity	within	the
universe,	is	understood	to	be	the	supreme	amongst	the	demigods,	human
beings	and	lower	animals.	But	beyond	Brahmā	there	is	the	Transcendence
who	has	no	material	form	and	is	free	from	all	material	contaminations.
Anyone	who	can	know	Him	also	becomes	transcendental,	but	those	who	do
not	know	Him	suffer	the	miseries	of	the	material	world."
The	impersonalist	puts	more	stress	on	the	word	
arūpam.	
But	this	
arūpam
	is
not	impersonal.	It	indicates	the	transcendental	form	of	eternity,	bliss	andknowledge	as	described	in	the	
Brahma-saṁhitā	
quoted	above.	Other	verses	in
the	
Śvetāśvatara	Upaniṣad	
substantiate	this	as	follows:
vedāham	etaṁ	puruṣaṁ	mahāntam	āditya-varṇaṁ	tamasaḥ	parastāt
tam	eva	vidvān	amṛta	iha	bhavati	nānyaḥ	panthā	vidyate	ayanāya
yasmāt	paraṁ	nāparam	asti	kiñcid	yasmānnāṇīyo	na	jyāyo	'sti	kiñcit
"I	know	that	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	who	is	transcendental	to	all
material	conceptions	of	darkness.	Only	he	who	knows	Him	can	transcend	the
bonds	of	birth	and	death.	There	is	no	way	for	liberation	other	than	this
knowledge	of	that	Supreme	Person.
"There	is	no	truth	superior	to	that	Supreme	Person	because	He	is	the
supermost.	He	is	smaller	than	the	smallest,	and	He	is	greater	than	the	greatest.
He	is	situated	as	a	silent	tree,	and	He	illumines	the	transcendental	sky,	and	as	a
tree	spreads	its	roots,	He	spreads	His	extensive	energies."
From	these	verses	one	concludes	that	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth	is	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	who	is	all-pervading	by	His	multi-	energies,
both	material	and	spiritual.
TEXT	8
र स ो ऽ ह म ᇴ स ु
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
प ् र भ ा ि ᇿ म
	
श ि श स ू य ᆼ य ो ः
	
।
प ् र ण व ः
	
स व ᆼ व े द े ष ु
	
श ᇶ द ः
	
ख े
	
प ौ ኄ ष ं
	
न ृ ष ु
	
॥
८
॥
raso	'ham	apsu	kaunteya
prabhāsmi	śaśi-sūryayoḥ
praṇavaḥ	sarva-vedeṣu
śabdaḥ	khe	pauruṣaṁ	nṛṣu
rasaḥ—
taste;	
aham—
I;
	apsu—
in	water;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of	Kuntī;	
prabhā
asmi—
I	am	the	light;	
śaśi-sūryayoḥ—
in	the	sun	and	the	moon;	
praṇavaḥ—
the
three	letters	A.U.M.;	
sarva—
in	all;	
vedeṣu—
in	the	
Vedas;	śab	daḥ—
sound
vibration;	
khe—
in	the	ether;	
pauruṣam—
ability;	
nṛṣu—
in	man.
TRANSLATION
O	son	of	Kuntī	[Arjuna],	I	am	the	taste	of	water,	the	light	of	the	sunand	the	moon,	the	syllable	om	in	the	Vedic	mantras;	I	am	the	sound	in
ether	and	ability	in	man.
PURPORT
This	verse	explains	how	the	Lord	is	all-pervasive	by	His	diverse	material
and	spiritual	energies.	The	Supreme	Lord	can	be	preliminarily	perceived	by
His	different	energies,	and	in	this	way	He	is	realized	impersonally.	As	the
demigod	in	the	sun	is	a	person	and	is	perceived	by	his	all-pervading	energy,
the	sunshine,	similarly,	the	Lord,	although	in	His	eternal	abode,	is	perceived
by	His	all-pervading,	diffusive	energies.	The	taste	of	water	is	the	active
principle	of	water.	No	one	likes	to	drink	sea	water	because	the	pure	taste	of
water	is	mixed	with	salt.	Attraction	for	water	depends	on	the	purity	of	the
taste,	and	this	pure	taste	is	one	of	the	energies	of	the	Lord.	The	impersonalist
perceives	the	presence	of	the	Lord	in	water	by	its	taste,	and	the	personalist
also	glorifies	the	Lord	for	His	kindly	supplying	water	to	quench	man's	thirst.
That	is	the	way	of	perceiving	the	Supreme.	Practically	speaking,	there	is	no
conflict	between	personalism	and	impersonalism.	One	who	knows	God	knows
that	the	impersonal	conception	and	personal	conception	are	simultaneously
present	in	everything	and	that	there	is	no	contradiction.	Therefore	Lord
Caitanya	established	His	sublime	doctrine:	
acintya-bheda	
and	
abheda-
tattvam-
simultaneously	one	and	different.
The	light	of	the	sun	and	the	moon	is	also	originally	emanating	from	the
brahmajyoti,	
which	is	the	impersonal	effulgence	of	the	Lord.	Similarly
praṇava
	or	the	
omkāra	
transcendental	sound	used	in	the	beginning	of	every
Vedic	hymn	to	address	the	Supreme	Lord	also	emanates	from	Him.	Because
the	impersonalists	are	very	much	afraid	of	addressing	the	Supreme	Lord	Kṛṣṇa
by	His	innumerable	names,	they	prefer	to	vibrate	the	transcendental	sound
omkāra.	
But	they	do	not	realize	that	
omkāra
	is	the	sound	representation	of
Kṛṣṇa.	The	jurisdiction	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	extends	everywhere,	and	one
who	knows	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	blessed.	Those	who	do	not	know	Kṛṣṇa	are
in	illusion,	and	so	knowledge	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	liberation,	and	ignorance	of	Him	is
bondage.
TEXT	9
प ु ᇯ य ो
	
ग ᇳ ध ः
	
प ृ ि थ ᇼ य ा ं
	
च
	
त े ज ᇽ च ा ि ᇿ म
	
ि व भ ा व स ौ
	
।ज ी व न ं
	
स व ᆼ भ ू त े ष ु
	
त प ᇽ च ा ि ᇿ म
	
त प ि ᇿ व ष ु
	
॥
९
॥
puṇyo	gandhaḥ	pṛthivyāṁ	ca
tejaś	cāsmi	vibhāvasau
jīvanaṁ	sarva-bhūteṣu
tapaś	cāsmi	tapasviṣu
puṇyaḥ—
original;	
gandhaḥ—
fragrance;	
pṛthivyām—
in	the	earth;	
ca—
also;
tejaḥ—
temperature;	
ca—
also;	
asmi—
I	am;	
vibhāvasau—
in	the	fire;	
jīvanam
—
life;	
sarva—
all;	
bhūteṣu—
living	entities;	
tapaḥ—
penance;	
ca—
also;	
asmi—
I
am;	
tapasviṣu—
in	those	who	practice	penance.
TRANSLATION
I	am	the	original	fragrance	of	the	earth,	and	I	am	the	heat	in	fire.	I	am
the	life	of	all	that	lives,	and	I	am	the	penances	of	all	ascetics.
PURPORT
Puṇya
	means	that	which	is	not	decomposed;	
puṇya
	is	original.	Everything
in	the	material	world	has	a	certain	flavor	or	fragrance,	as	the	flavor	and
fragrance	in	a	flower,	or	in	the	earth,	in	water,	in	fire,	in	air,	etc.	The
uncontaminated	flavor,	the	original	flavor,	which	permeates	everything,	is
Kṛṣṇa.	Similarly,	everything	has	a	particular	original	taste,	and	this	taste	can
be	changed	by	the	mixture	of	chemicals.	So	everything	original	has	some
smell,	some	fragrance,	and	some	taste.	
Vibhāva	
means	fire.	Without	fire	we
cannot	run	factories,	we	cannot	cook,	etc.,	and	that	fire	is	Kṛṣṇa.	The	heat	in
the	fire	is	Kṛṣṇa.	According	to	Vedic	medicine,	indigestion	is	due	to	a	low
temperature	in	the	belly.	So	even	for	digestion	fire	is	needed.	In	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	we	become	aware	that	earth,	water,	fire,	air	and	every	active
principle,	all	chemicals	and	all	material	elements	are	due	to	Kṛṣṇa.	The
duration	of	man's	life	is	also	due	to	Kṛṣṇa.	Therefore	by	the	grace	of	Kṛṣṇa,
man	can	prolong	his	life	or	diminish	it.	So	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	active	in
every	sphere.TEXT	10
ब ी ज ं
	
म ा ं
	
स व ᆼ भ ू त ा न ा ं
	
ि व द ् ि ध
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
स न ा त न म ्
	
।
ब ु द ् ि ध ब ु ᆼद ् ि ध म त ा म ि ᇿ म
	
त े ज ᇿ त े ज ि ᇿ व न ा म ह म ्
	
॥
१ ०
॥
bījaṁ	māṁ	sarva-bhūtānāṁ
viddhi	pārtha	sanātanam
buddhir	buddhimatām	asmi
tejas	tejasvinām	aham
bījam—
seed;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
sarva-bhūtānām—
of	all	living	entities;	
viddhi
—
try	to	understand;	
pārtha
—O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
sanātanam—
original,	eternal;
buddhiḥ—
intelligence;	
buddhimatām—
of	the	intelligent;	
asmi—
I	am;	
tejaḥ
—
prowess;	
tejasvinām—
of	the	powerful;	
aham—
I	am.
TRANSLATION
O	son	of	Pṛthā,	know	that	I	am	the	original	seed	of	all	existences,	the
intelligence	of	the	intelligent,	and	the	prowess	of	all	powerful	men.
PURPORT
Bījam	
means	seed;	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	seed	of	everything.	In	contact	with	material
nature,	the	seed	fructifies	into	various	living	entities,	movable	and	inert.	Birds,
beasts,	men	and	many	other	living	creatures	are	moving	living	entities;	trees
and	plants,	however,	are	inert-they	cannot	move,	but	only	stand.	Every	entity
is	contained	within	the	scope	of	8,400,000	species	of	life;	some	of	them	are
moving	and	some	of	them	are	inert.	In	all	cases,	however,	the	seed	of	their	life
is	Kṛṣṇa.	As	stated	in	Vedic	literature,	Brahman,	or	the	Supreme	Absolute
Truth,	is	that	from	which	everything	is	emanating.	Kṛṣṇa	is	Parabrahman,	the
Supreme	Spirit.	Brahman	is	impersonal	and	Parabrahman	is	personal.
Impersonal	Brahman	is	situated	in	the	personal	aspect-that	is	stated	in
Bhagavad-gītā.	
Therefore,	originally,	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	source	of	everything.	He	is
the	root.	As	the	root	of	a	tree	maintains	the	whole	tree,	Kṛṣṇa,	being	the
original	root	of	all	things,	maintains	everything	in	this	material	manifestation.This	is	also	confirmed	in	the	Vedic	literature.	
Yato	vā	imāni	bhūtāni	jāyante.
"The	Supreme	Absolute	Truth	is	that	from	which	everything	is	born."	He	is
the	prime	eternal	among	all	eternals.	He	is	the	supreme	living	entity	of	all
living	entities,	and	He	alone	is	maintaining	all	life.	Kṛṣṇa	also	says	that	He	is
the	root	of	all	intelligence.	Unless	a	person	is	intelligent	he	cannot	understand
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	11
ब ल ं
	
ब ल व त ा ं
	
च ा ह ं
	
क ा म र ा ग ि व व ि ज ᆼ त म ्
	
।
ध म ा ᆼ ि व ኄ ሬ ो
	
भ ू त े ष ु
	
क ा म ो ऽ ि ᇿ म
	
भ र त ष ᆼ भ
	
॥
१ १
॥
balaṁ	balavatāṁ	cāhaṁ
kāma-rāga-vivarjitam
dharmāviruddho	bhūteṣu
kāmo	'smi	bharatarṣabha
balam—
strength;	
balavatām—
of	the	strong;	
ca—
and;	
aham—
I	am;	
kāma—
passion;	
rāga
—attachment;	
vivarjitam
—devoid	of;	
dharma-aviruddha—
not
against	the	religious	principles;	
bhūteṣu—
in	all	beings;	
kāmaḥ—
sex-life;	
asmi
—
I	am;
	bharatarṣabha
—O	lord	of	the	Bhāratas.
TRANSLATION
I	am	the	strength	of	the	strong,	devoid	of	passion	and	desire.	I	am	sex
life	which	is	not	contrary	to	religious	principles,	O	Lord	of	the	Bhāratas
[Arjuna].
PURPORT
The	strong	man's	strength	should	be	applied	to	protect	the	weak,	not	for
personal	aggression.	Similarly,	sex	life,	according	to	religious	principles
(dharma),	
should	be	for	the	propagation	of	children,	not	otherwise.	The
responsibility	of	parents	is	then	to	make	their	offspring	Kṛṣṇa	conscious.
TEXT	12य े
	
च ै व
	
स ा ि ᇰ ᇰ व क ा
	
भ ा व ा
	
र ा ज स ा ᇿ त ा म स ा ᇽ च
	
य े
	
।
म ሧ
	
ए व े ि त
	
त ा ि ᇳ व द ् ि ध
	
न
	
ᇰ व ह ं
	
त े ष ु
	
त े
	
म ि य
	
॥
१ २
॥
ye	caiva	sāttvikā	bhāvā
rājasās	tāmasāś	ca	ye
matta	eveti	tān	viddhi
na	tv	ahaṁ	teṣu	te	mayi
ye
—all	those;	
ca
—and;	
eva
—certainly;	
sāttvikāḥ—
in	goodness;	
bhāvāḥ—
states	of	being;	
rājasāḥ—
mode	of	passion;	
tāmasāḥ
—mode	of	ignorance;	
ca
—also;	
ye
—although;	
mattaḥ
—from	Me;	
eva
—certainly;	
iti—
thus;	
tān
—
those;	
viddhi—
try	to	know;	
na
—not;	
tu
—but;	
aham
—I;	
teṣu
—in	those;	
te
—
they;	
mayi
—unto	Me.
TRANSLATION
All	states	of	being-be	they	of	goodness,	passion	or	ignorance—are
manifested	by	My	energy.	I	am,	in	one	sense,	everything—but	I	am
independent.	I	am	not	under	the	modes	of	this	material	nature.
PURPORT
All	material	activities	in	the	world	are	being	conducted	under	the	three
modes	of	material	nature.	Although	these	material	modes	of	nature	are
emanations	from	the	Supreme	Lord,	Kṛṣṇa,	He	is	not	subject	to	them.	For
instance,	under	the	state	laws	one	may	be	punished,	but	the	king,	the
lawmaker,	is	not	subject	to	that	law.	Similarly,	all	the	modes	of	material	nature
—goodness,	passion	and	ignorance—are	emanations	from	the	Supreme	Lord
Kṛṣṇa,	but	Kṛṣṇa	is	not	subject	to	material	nature.	Therefore	He	is	
nirguṇa,
which	means	that	these	
guṇas,	
or	modes,	although	issuing	from	Him,	do	not
affect	Him.	That	is	one	of	the	special	characteristics	of	Bhagavān,	or	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.
TEXT	13
ि त ् र ि भ ग ु ᆼ ण म य ै भ ा ᆼ व ैर े ि भ ः
	
स व ᆼ ि म द ं
	
ज ग त ्
	
।म ो ि ह त ं
	
न ा ि भ ज ा न ा ि त
	
म ा म े ᇷ य ः
	
प र म ᇼ य य म ्
	
॥
१ ३
॥
tribhir	guṇamayair	bhāvair
ebhiḥ	sarvam	idaṁ	jagat
mohitaṁ	nābhijānāti
mām	ebhyaḥ	param	avyayam
tribhiḥ—
three;	
guṇamayaiḥ
—by	the	three	
guṇas
;	
bhāvaiḥ—
state	of	being;
ebhiḥ—
all	this;	
sarvam
—the	whole	world;	
idam
—in	this	world;	
jagat
—
universe;	
mohitam—
deluded;	
na	abhijānāti—
do	not	know;	
mām
—unto	Me;
ebhyaḥ—
above	these;	
param
—the	Supreme;	
avyayam
—inexhaustible.
TRANSLATION
Deluded	by	the	three	modes	[goodness,	passion	and	ignorance],	the
whole	world	does	not	know	Me	who	am	above	the	modes	and
inexhaustible.
PURPORT
The	whole	world	is	enchanted	by	three	modes	of	material	nature.	Those
who	are	bewildered	by	these	three	modes	cannot	understand	that
transcendental	to	this	material	nature	is	the	Supreme	Lord,	Kṛṣṇa.	In	this
material	world	everyone	is	under	the	influence	of	these	three	
guṇas	
and	is	thus
bewildered.
By	nature	living	entities	have	particular	types	of	body	and	particular	types
of	psychic	and	biological	activities	accordingly.	There	are	four	classes	of	men
functioning	in	the	three	material	modes	of	nature.	Those	who	are	purely	in	the
mode	of	goodness	are	called	
brāhmaṇas.	
Those	who	are	purely	in	the	mode	of
passion	are	called	
kṣatriyas.	
Those	who	are	in	the	modes	of	both	passion	and
ignorance	are	called	
vaiśyas.	
Those	who	are	completely	in	ignorance	are
called	
śūdras.	
And	those	who	are	less	than	that	are	animals	or	animal	life.
However,	these	designations	are	not	permanent.	I	may	either	be	a	
brāhmaṇa,
kṣatriya,	vaiśya	
or	whatever-in	any	case,	this	life	is	temporary.	But	although
life	is	temporary	and	we	do	not	know	what	we	are	going	to	be	in	the	next	life,
still,	by	the	spell	of	this	illusory	energy,	we	consider	ourselves	in	the	light	of
this	bodily	conception	of	life,	and	we	thus	think	that	we	are	American,	Indian,Russian	or	
brāhmaṇa,	
Hindu,	Muslim,	etc.	And	if	we	become	entangled	with
the	modes	of	material	nature,	then	we	forget	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead	who	is	behind	all	these	modes.	So	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	says	that	men,
deluded	by	these	three	modes	of	nature,	do	not	understand	that	behind	the
material	background	is	the	Supreme	Godhead.
There	are	many	different	kinds	of	living	entities-human	beings,	demigods,
animals,	etc.-and	each	and	every	one	of	them	is	under	the	influence	of
material	nature,	and	all	of	them	have	forgotten	the	transcendent	Personality	of
Godhead.	Those	who	are	in	the	modes	of	passion	and	ignorance,	and	even
those	who	are	in	the	mode	of	goodness,	cannot	go	beyond	the	impersonal
Brahman	conception	of	the	Absolute	Truth.	They	are	bewildered	before	the
Supreme	Lord	in	His	personal	feature,	which	possesses	all	beauty,	opulence,
knowledge,	strength,	fame	and	renunciation.	When	even	those	who	are	in
goodness	cannot	understand,	what	hope	is	there	for	those	in	passion	and
ignorance?	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	transcendental	to	all	these	three	modes	of
material	nature,	and	those	who	are	truly	established	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness
are	actually	liberated.
TEXT	14
द ै व ी
	
ቋ े ष ा
	
ग ु ण म य ी
	
म म
	
म ा य ा
	
द ु र ᇰ य य ा
	
।
म ा म े व
	
य े
	
प ् र प ሱ ᇳ त े
	
म ा य ा म े त ा ं
	
त र ि ᇳ त
	
त े
	
॥
१ ४
॥
daivī	hy	eṣā	guṇamayī
mama	māyā	duratyayā
mām	eva	ye	prapadyante
māyām	etāṁ	taranti	te
daivī—
transcendental;	
hi—
certainly;	
eṣā—
this;	
guṇamayī—
consisting	of	the
three	modes	of	material	nature;	
mama—
My;	
māyā—
energy;	
duratyayā	
—very
difficult	to	overcome;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
eva—
certainly;	
ye—
those;	
prapadyante
—
surrender;	
māyām	etām—
this	illusory	energy;	
taranti—
overcome;	
te—
they.
TRANSLATION
This	divine	energy	of	Mine,	consisting	of	the	three	modes	of	material
nature,	is	difficult	to	overcome.	But	those	who	have	surrendered	unto	Mecan	easily	cross	beyond	it.
PURPORT
The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	has	innumerable	energies,	and	all
these	energies	are	divine.	Although	the	living	entities	are	part	of	His	energies
and	are	therefore	divine,	due	to	contact	with	material	energy,	their	original
superior	power	is	covered.	Being	thus	covered	by	material	energy,	one	cannot
possibly	overcome	its	influence.	As	previously	stated,	both	the	material	and
spiritual	natures,	being	emanations	from	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
are	eternal.	The	living	entities	belong	to	the	eternal	superior	nature	of	the
Lord,	but	due	to	contamination	by	the	inferior	nature,	matter,	their	illusion	is
also	eternal.	The	conditioned	soul	is	therefore	called	
nitya-baddha,	
or
eternally	conditioned.	No	one	can	trace	out	the	history	of	his	becoming
conditioned	at	a	certain	date	in	material	history.	Consequently,	his	release
from	the	clutches	of	material	nature	is	very	difficult,	even	though	that	material
nature	is	an	inferior	energy,	because	material	energy	is	ultimately	conducted
by	the	supreme	will,	which	the	living	entity	cannot	overcome.	Inferior
material	nature	is	defined	herein	as	divine	nature	due	to	its	divine	connection
and	movement	by	the	divine	will.	Being	conducted	by	divine	will,	material
nature,	although	inferior,	acts	so	wonderfully	in	the	construction	and
destruction	of	the	cosmic	manifestation.	The	
Vedas
	confirm	this	as	follows:
māyāṁ	tu	prakṛtiṁ	vidyān	māyinaṁ	tu	maheśvaram.
"Although	
māyā	
[illusion]	is	false	or	temporary,	the	background	of	
māyā	
is	the
supreme	magician,	the	Personality	of	Godhead,	who	is	Maheśvara,	the
supreme	controller."
Another	meaning	of	
guṇa	
is	rope;	it	is	to	be	understood	that	the	conditioned
soul	is	tightly	tied	by	the	ropes	of	illusion.	A	man	bound	by	the	hands	and	feet
cannot	free	himself-he	must	be	helped	by	a	person	who	is	unbound.	Because
the	bound	cannot	help	the	bound,	the	rescuer	must	be	liberated.	Therefore,
only	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	or	His	bona	fide	representative	the	spiritual	master,	can
release	the	conditioned	soul.	Without	such	superior	help,	one	cannot	be	freed
from	the	bondage	of	material	nature.	Devotional	service,	or	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	can	help	one	gain	such	release.	Kṛṣṇa,	being	the	Lord	of
illusory	energy,	can	order	this	insurmountable	energy	to	release	the
conditioned	soul.	He	orders	this	release	out	of	His	causeless	mercy	on	thesurrendered	soul	and	out	of	His	paternal	affection	for	the	living	entity	who	is
originally	a	beloved	son	of	the	Lord.	Therefore	surrender	unto	the	lotus	feet	of
the	Lord	is	the	only	means	to	get	free	from	the	clutches	of	the	stringent
material	nature.
The	words	
mām	eva	
are	also	significant.	
Mām	
means	unto	Kṛṣṇa	(Viṣṇu)
only,	and	not	Brahmā	or	Śiva.	Although	Brahmā	and	Śiva	are	greatly	elevated
and	are	almost	on	the	level	of	Viṣṇu,	it	is	not	possible	for	such	incarnations	of
rājo-guṇa	
(passion)	and	
tamo-guṇa	
(ignorance)	to	release	the	conditioned	soul
from	the	clutches	of	
māyā.	
In	other	words,	both	Brahmā	and	Śiva	are	also
under	the	influence	of	
māyā.	
Only	Viṣṇu	is	the	master	of	
māyā;	
therefore	He
can	alone	give	release	to	the	conditioned	soul.	The	
Vedas	
confirm	this	in	the
phrase	
tvam	eva	viditvā	
or	"Freedom	is	possible	only	by	understanding
Kṛṣṇa."	Even	Lord	Śiva	affirms	that	liberation	can	be	achieved	only	by	the
mercy	of	Viṣṇu.	Lord	Śiva	says:
mukti-pradātā	sarveṣāṁ	viṣṇur	eva	na	saṁśayaḥ.
"There	is	no	doubt	that	Viṣṇu	is	the	deliverer	of	liberation	for	everyone.
TEXT	15
न
	
म ा ं
	
द ु ᇾ क ृ ि त न ो
	
म ू ढ ा ः
	
प ् र प ሱ ᇳ त े
	
न र ा ध म ा ः
	
।
म ा य य ा प ᇦ त ᇥ ा न ा
	
आ स ु र ं
	
भ ा व म ा ि श ् र त ा ः
	
॥
१ ५
॥
na	māṁ	duṣkṛtino	mūḍhāḥ
prapadyante	narādhamāḥ
māyayāpahṛta-jñānā
āsuraṁ	bhāvam	āśritāḥ
na—
not;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
duṣkṛtinaḥ—
miscreants;	
mūḍhāḥ—
foolish;
prapadyante—
surrender;	
narādhamāḥ—
lowest	among	mankind;	
māyayā—	
by
the	illusory	energy;	
apahṛta—
stolen	by	illusion;	
jñānāḥ—
knowledge;	
asuram
—
demonic;	
bhāvam—
nature;	
āśritāḥ—
accepting.
TRANSLATION
Those	miscreants	who	are	grossly	foolish,	lowest	among	mankind,whose	knowledge	is	stolen	by	illusion,	and	who	partake	of	the	atheistic
nature	of	demons,	do	not	surrender	unto	Me.
PURPORT
It	is	said	in	
Bhagavad-gītā	
that	simply	by	surrendering	oneself	unto	the
lotus	feet	of	the	Supreme	Personality	Kṛṣṇa,	one	can	surmount	the	stringent
laws	of	material	nature.	At	this	point	a	question	arises:	How	is	it	that	educated
philosophers,	scientists,	businessmen,	administrators	and	all	the	leaders	of
ordinary	men	do	not	surrender	to	the	lotus	feet	of	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa,	the	all-powerful
Personality	of	Godhead?	
Mukti,	
or	liberation	from	the	laws	of	material	nature,
is	sought	by	the	leaders	of	mankind	in	different	ways	and	with	great	plans	and
perseverance	for	a	great	many	years	and	births.	But	if	that	liberation	is
possible	by	simply	surrendering	unto	the	lotus	feet	of	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead,	then	why	don't	these	intelligent	and	hard-working	leaders	adopt
this	simple	method?
The	
Gītā	
answers	this	question	very	frankly.	Those	really	learned	leaders	of
society	like	Brahmā,	Śiva,	Kapila,	the	Kumāras,	Manu,	Vyāsa,	Devala,	Asita,
Janaka,	Prahlāda,	Bali,	and	later	on	Madhvācārya,	Rāmānujācārya,	Śrī
Caitanya	and	many	others
—
who	are	faithful	philosophers,	politicians,
educators,	scientists,	etc.
—
surrender	to	the	lotus	feet	of	the	Supreme	Person,
the	all-powerful	authority.	Those	who	are	not	actually	philosophers,	scientists,
educators,	administrators,	etc.,	but	who	pose	themselves	as	such	for	material
gain,	do	not	accept	the	plan	or	path	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	They	have	no	idea
of	God;	they	simply	manufacture	their	own	worldly	plans	and	consequently
complicate	the	problems	of	material	existence	in	their	vain	attempts	to	solve
them.	Because	material	energy	(nature)	is	so	powerful,	it	can	resist	the
unauthorized	plans	of	the	atheists	and	baffle	the	knowledge	of	"planning
commissions."
The	atheistic	plan-makers	are	described	herein	by	the	word	
duṣkṛtina,	
or
"miscreants."	
Kṛtina	
means	one	who	has	performed	meritorious	work.	The
atheist	planmaker	is	sometimes	very	intelligent	and	meritorious	also,	because
any	gigantic	plan,	good	or	bad,	must	take	intelligence	to	execute.	But	because
the	atheist's	brain	is	improperly	utilized	in	opposing	the	plan	of	the	Supreme
Lord,	the	atheistic	planmaker	is	called	
duṣkṛtina,	
which	indicates	that	his
intelligence	and	efforts	are	misdirected.
In	the	
Gītā	
it	is	clearly	mentioned	that	material	energy	works	fully	under
the	direction	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	It	has	no	independant	authority.	It	works	asthe	shadow	moves,	in	accordance	with	the	movements	of	the	object.	But	still
material	energy	is	very	powerful,	and	the	atheist,	due	to	his	godless
temperament,	cannot	know	how	it	works;	nor	can	he	know	the	plan	of	the
Supreme	Lord.	Under	illusion	and	the	modes	of	passion	and	ignorance,	all	his
plans	are	baffled,	as	in	the	case	of	Hiraṇyakaśipu	and	Rāvaṇa,	whose	plans
were	smashed	to	dust	although	they	were	both	materially	learned	as	scientists,
philosophers,	administrators	and	educators.	These	
duṣkṛtinas,	
or	miscreants,
are	of	four	different	patterns,	as	outlined	below:
(1)	The	
mūḍhas	
are	those	who	are	grossly	foolish,	like	hard-working	beasts
of	burden.	They	want	to	enjoy	the	fruits	of	their	labor	by	themselves,	and	so
do	not	want	to	part	with	them	for	the	Supreme.	The	typical	example	of	the
beast	of	burden	is	the	ass.	This	humble	beast	is	made	to	work	very	hard	by	his
master.	The	ass	does	not	really	know	for	whom	he	works	so	hard	day	and
night.	He	remains	satisfied	by	filling	his	stomach	with	a	bundle	of	grass,
sleeping	for	a	while	under	fear	of	being	beaten	by	his	master,	and	satisfying
his	sex	appetite	at	the	risk	of	being	repeatedly	kicked	by	the	opposite	party.
The	ass	sings	poetry	and	philosophy	sometimes,	but	this	braying	only	disturbs
others.	This	is	the	position	of	the	foolish	fruitive	worker	who	does	not	know
for	whom	he	should	work.	He	does	not	know	that	
karma	
(action)	is	meant	for
yajña	
(sacrifice).
Most	often,	those	who	work	very	hard	day	and	night	to	clear	the	burden	of
self-created	duties	say	that	they	have	no	time	to	hear	of	the	immortality	of	the
living	being.	To	such	
mūḍhas,	
material	gains,	which	are	destructible,	are	life's
all	in	all—despite	the	fact	that	the	
mūḍhas	
enjoy	only	a	very	small	fraction	of
the	fruit	of	labor.	Sometimes	they	spend	sleepless	days	and	nights	for	fruitive
gain,	and	although	they	may	have	ulcers	or	indigestion,	they	are	satisfied	with
practically	no	food;	they	are	simply	absorbed	in	working	hard	day	and	night
for	the	benefit	of	illusory	masters.	Ignorant	of	their	real	master,	the	foolish
workers	waste	their	valuable	time	serving	mammon.	Unfortunately,	they	never
surrender	to	the	supreme	master	of	all	masters,	nor	do	they	take	time	to	hear
of	Him	from	the	proper	sources.	The	swine	who	eat	the	soil	do	not	care	to
accept	sweetmeats	made	of	sugar	and	ghee.	Similarly,	the	foolish	worker	will
untiringly	continue	to	hear	of	the	sense-enjoyable	tidings	of	the	flickering
mundane	force	that	moves	the	material	world.
(2)	Another	class	of	
duṣkṛtina,	
or	miscreant,	is	called	the	
narādhama,	
or	the
lowest	of	mankind.	
Nara	
means	human	being,	and	
adhama	
means	the	lowest.
Out	of	the	8,400,000	different	species	of	living	beings,	there	are	400,000
human	species.	Out	of	these	there	are	numerous	lower	forms	of	human	lifethat	are	mostly	uncivilized.	The	civilized	human	beings	are	those	who	have
regulated	principles	of	social,	political	and	religious	life.	Those	who	are
socially	and	politically	developed,	but	who	have	no	religious	principles,	must
be	considered	
narādhamas.	
Nor	is	religion	without	God	religion,	because	the
purpose	of	following	religious	principles	is	to	know	the	Supreme	Truth	and
man's	relation	with	Him.	In	the	
Gītā
	the	Personality	of	Godhead	clearly	states
that	there	is	no	authority	above	Him	and	that	He	is	the	Supreme	Truth.	The
civilized	form	of	human	life	is	meant	for	man's	
reviving	the	lost	consciousness
of	his	eternal	relation	with	the	Supreme	Truth,	the	Personality	of	Godhead	Śrī
Kṛṣṇa,	who	is	all-powerful.	Whoever	loses	this	chance	is	classified	as	a
narādhama.	
We	get	information	from	revealed	scriptures	that	when	the	baby
is	in	the	mother's	womb	(an	extremely	uncomfortable	situation)	he	prays	to
God	for	deliverance	and	promises	to	worship	Him	alone	as	soon	as	he	gets
out.	To	pray	to	God	when	he	is	in	difficulty	is	a	natural	instinct	in	every	living
being	because	he	is	eternally	related	with	God.	But	after	his	deliverance,	the
child	forgets	the	difficulties	of	birth	and	forgets	his	deliverer	also,	being
influenced	by	
māyā
,	the	illusory	energy.
It	is	the	duty	of	the	guardians	of	children	to	revive	the	divine	consciousness
dormant	in	them.	The	ten	processes	of	reformatory	ceremonies,	as	enjoined	in
the	
Manu-smṛti,	
which	is	the	guide	to	religious	principles,	are	meant	for
reviving	God	consciousness	in	the	system	of	
varṇāśrama.	
However,	no
process	is	strictly	followed	now	in	any	part	of	the	world,	and	therefore	99.9
percent	of	the	population	is	
narādhama.
When	the	whole	population	becomes	
narādhama,	
naturally	all	their	so-
called	education	is	made	null	and	void	by	the	all-powerful	energy	of	physical
nature.	According	to	the	standard	of	the	
Gītā,	
a	learned	man	is	he	who	sees	on
equal	terms	the	learned	
brāhmaṇa,	
the	dog,	the	cow,	the	elephant	and	the	dog-
eater.	That	is	the	vision	of	a	true	devotee.	Śrī	Nityānanda	Prabhu,	who	is	the
incarnation	of	Godhead	as	divine	master,	delivered	the	typical	
narādhamas,
the	brothers	Jagai	and	Madhai,	and	showed	how	the	mercy	of	a	real	devotee	is
bestowed	upon	the	lowest	of	mankind.	So	the	
narādhama	
who	is	condemned
by	the	Personality	of	Godhead	can	again	revive	his	spiritual	consciousness
only	by	the	mercy	of	a	devotee.
Śrī	Caitanya	Mahāprabhu,	in	propagating	the	
bhāgavata-dharma	
or
activities	of	the	devotees,	has	recommended	that	people	submissively	hear	the
message	of	the	Personality	of	Godhead.	The	essence	of	this	message	is
Bhagavad-gītā.	
The	lowest	amongst	human	beings	can	be	delivered	by	this
submissive	hearing	process	only,	but	unfortunately	they	even	deny	giving	anaural	reception	to	these	messages,	and	what	to	speak	of	surrendering	to	the
will	of	the	Supreme	Lord?	
Narādhamas,	
or	the	lowest	of	mankind,	will	fully
neglect	the	prime	duty	of	the	human	being.
(3)	The	next	class	of	
duṣkṛtina
	is	called	
māyayāpahṛta-jñāna,	
or	those
persons	whose	erudite	knowledge	has	been	nullified	by	the	influence	of
illusory	material	energy.	They	are	mostly	very	learned	fellows
—
great
philosophers,	poets,	literati,	scientists,	etc.
—
but	the	illusory	energy	misguides
them,	and	therefore	they	disobey	the	Supreme	Lord.
There	are	a	great	number	of	
māyayāpahṛta-jñānas	
at	the	present	moment,
even	amongst	the	scholars	of	the	
Gītā
.	In	the	
Gītā
,	in	plain	and	simple
language,	it	is	stated	that	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.
There	is	none	equal	to	or	greater	than	Him.	He	is	mentioned	as	the	father	of
Brahmā,	the	original	father	of	all	human	beings.	In	fact,	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	is	said	to	be
not	only	the	father	of	Brahmā	but	also	the	father	of	all	species	of	life.	He	is	the
root	of	the	impersonal	Brahman	and	Paramātmā;	the	Supersoul	in	every	entity
is	His	plenary	portion.	He	is	the	fountainhead	of	everything,	and	everyone	is
advised	to	surrender	unto	His	lotus	feet.	Despite	all	these	clear	statements,	the
māyayāpahṛta-jñāna	
deride	the	Personality	of	the	Supreme	Lord	and	consider
Him	merely	another	human	being.	They	do	not	know	that	the	blessed	form	of
human	life	is	designed	after	the	eternal	and	transcendental	feature	of	the
Supreme	Lord.
All	the	unauthorized	interpretations	of	the	
Gītā	
by	the	class	of
māyayāpahṛta-jñāna,	
outside	the	purview	of	the	
paramparā
	system,	are	so
many	stumbling	blocks	in	the	path	of	spiritual	understanding.	The	deluded
interpreters	do	not	surrender	unto	the	lotus	feet	of	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa,	nor	do	they	teach
others	to	follow	this	principle.
(4)	The	last	class	of	
duṣkṛtina	
is	called	
āsuraṁ	bhāvam	āśrita,	
or	those	of
demonic	principles.	This	class	is	openly	atheistic.	Some	of	them	argue	that	the
Supreme	Lord	can	never	descend	upon	this	material	world,	but	they	are	unable
to	give	any	tangible	reasons	as	to	why	not.	There	are	others	who	make	Him
subordinate	to	the	impersonal	feature,	although	the	opposite	is	declared	in	the
Gītā.	
Envious	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	the	atheist	will	present
a	number	of	illicit	incarnations	manufactured	in	the	factory	of	his	brain.	Such
persons	whose	very	principle	of	life	is	to	decry	the	Personality	of	Godhead
cannot	surrender	unto	the	lotus	feet	of	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.
Śrī	Yāmunācārya	Albandru	of	South	India	said,	"O	my	Lord!	You	are
unknowable	to	persons	involved	with	atheistic	principles	despite	Your
uncommon	qualities,	features,	and	activities	and	despite	Your	personalitybeing	confirmed	by	all	the	revealed	scriptures	in	the	quality	of	goodness,	and
despite	Your	being	acknowledged	by	the	famous	authorities	renowned	for
their	depth	of	knowledge	in	the	transcendental	science	and	situated	in	the
godly	qualities."
Therefore,	(1)	grossly	foolish	persons,	(2)	the	lowest	of	mankind,	(3)	the
deluded	speculators,	and	(4)	the	professed	atheists,	as	above	mentioned,	never
surrender	unto	the	lotus	feet	of	the	Personality	of	Godhead	in	spite	of	all
scriptural	and	authoritative	advice.
TEXT	16
च त ु ि व ᆼ ध ा
	
भ ज ᇳ त े
	
म ा ं
	
ज न ा ः
	
स ु क ृ ि त न ो ऽ ज ु ᆼ न
	
।
आ त ो ᆼ
	
ि ज ᇥ ा स ु र थ ा ᆼ थ ी ᆼ
	
ᇥ ा न ी
	
च
	
भ र त ष ᆼ भ
	
॥
१ ६
॥
catur-vidhā	bhajante	māṁ
janāḥ	sukṛtino	'rjuna
ārto	jijñāsur	arthārthī
jñānī	ca	bharatarṣabha
catur-vidhāḥ—
four	kinds	of;	
bhajante—
render	services;	
mām
—unto	Me;
janāḥ—
persons;	
sukṛtinaḥ—
those	who	are	pious;	
arjuna
—O	Arjuna;	
ārtaḥ—
the	distressed;	
jijñāsuḥ—
the	inquisitive;	
artha-arthī—
one	who	desires
material	gain;	
jñānī—
one	who	knows	things	as	they	are;	
ca—
also;
bharatarṣabha
—O	great	one	amongst	the	descendants	of	Bharata.
TRANSLATION
O	best	among	the	Bhāratas	[Arjuna],	four	kinds	of	pious	men	render
devotional	service	unto	Me—the	distressed,	the	desirer	of	wealth,	the
inquisitive,	and	he	who	is	searching	for	knowledge	of	the	Absolute.
PURPORT
Unlike	the	miscreants,	these	are	adherents	of	the	regulative	principles	of	the
scriptures,	and	they	are	called	
sukṛtina
,	or	those	who	obey	the	rules	and
regulations	of	scriptures,	the	moral	and	social	laws,	and	are,	more	or	less,devoted	to	the	Supreme	Lord.	Out	of	these	there	are	four	classes	of	men—
those	who	are	sometimes	distressed,	those	who	are	in	need	of	money,	those
who	are	sometimes	inquisitive,	and	those	who	are	sometimes	searching	after
knowledge	of	the	Absolute	Truth.	These	persons	come	to	the	Supreme	Lord
for	devotional	service	under	different	conditions.	These	are	not	pure	devotees
because	they	have	some	aspiration	to	fulfill	in	exchange	for	devotional
service.	Pure	devotional	service	is	without	aspiration	and	without	desire	for
material	profit.	The	
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
	defines	pure	devotion	thus:
anyābhilāṣitāśūnyaṁ	jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam
ānukūlyena	kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ	bhaktir	uttamā.
"One	should	render	transcendental	loving	service	to	the	Supreme	Lord	Kṛṣṇa
favorably	and	without	desire	for	material	profit	or	gain	through	fruitive
activities	or	philosophical	speculation.	That	is	called	pure	devotional	service."
When	these	four	kinds	of	persons	come	to	the	Supreme	Lord	for	devotional
service	and	are	completely	purified	by	the	association	of	a	pure	devotee,	they
also	become	pure	devotees.	As	far	as	the	miscreants	are	concerned,	for	them
devotional	service	is	very	difficult	because	their	lives	are	selfish,	irregular	and
without	spiritual	goals.	But	even	some	of	them,	by	chance,	when	they	come	in
contact	with	a	pure	devotee,	also	become	pure	devotees.
Those	who	are	always	busy	with	fruitive	activities	come	to	the	Lord	in
material	distress	and	at	that	time	associate	with	pure	devotees	and	become,	in
their	distress,	devotees	of	the	Lord.	Those	who	are	simply	frustrated	also
come	sometimes	to	associate	with	the	pure	devotees	and	become	inquisitive	to
know	about	God.	Similarly,	when	the	dry	philosophers	are	frustrated	in	every
field	of	knowledge,	they	sometimes	want	to	learn	of	God,	and	they	come	to
the	Supreme	Lord	to	render	devotional	service	and	thus	transcend	knowledge
of	the	impersonal	Brahman	and	the	localized	Paramātmā	and	come	to	the
personal	conception	of	Godhead	by	the	grace	of	the	Supreme	Lord	or	His	pure
devotee.	On	the	whole,	when	the	distressed,	the	inquisitive,	the	seekers	of
knowledge,	and	those	who	are	in	need	of	money	are	free	from	all	material
desires,	and	when	they	fully	understand	that	material	remuneration	has
nothing	to	do	with	spiritual	improvement,	they	become	pure	devotees.	As	long
as	such	a	purified	stage	is	not	attained,	devotees	in	transcendental	service	to
the	Lord	are	tainted	with	fruitive	activities,	and	they	search	after	mundane
knowledge,	etc.	So	one	has	to	transcend	all	this	before	one	can	come	to	the
stage	of	pure	devotional	service.TEXT	17
त े ष ा ं
	
ᇥ ा न ी
	
ि न ᇰ य य ु ᇧ त
	
ए क भ ि ᇧ त ि व ᆼ ि श ᇾ य त े
	
।
ि प ् र य ो
	
ि ह
	
ᇥ ा ि न न ो ऽ ᇰ य थ ᆼ म ह ं
	
स
	
च
	
म म
	
ि प ् र य ः
	
॥
१ ७
॥
teṣāṁ	jñānī	nitya-yukta
eka-bhaktir	viśiṣyate
priyo	hi	jñānino	'tyartham
ahaṁ	sa	ca	mama	priyaḥ
teṣām—
out	of	them;	
jñānī—
one	in	full	knowledge;	
nitya-yuktaḥ—
always
engaged;	
eka—
only	one;	
bhaktiḥ—
devotional	service;	
viśiṣyate—
especially;
priyaḥ—
very	dear;	
hi—
certainly;	
jñāninaḥ—
person	in	knowledge;	
atyartham
—
highly;	
aham—
I	am;	
saḥ—
he;	
ca—
also;	
mama—
Mine;	
priyaḥ
—dear.
TRANSLATION
Of	these,	the	wise	one	who	is	in	full	knowledge	in	union	with	Me
through	pure	devotional	service	is	the	best.	For	I	am	very	dear	to	him,
and	he	is	dear	to	Me.
PURPORT
Free	from	all	contaminations	of	material	desires,	the	distressed,	the
inquisitive,	the	penniless,	and	the	seeker	after	supreme	knowledge	can	all
become	pure	devotees.	But	out	of	them,	he	who	is	in	knowledge	of	the
Absolute	Truth	and	free	from	all	material	desires	becomes	a	really	pure
devotee	of	the	Lord.	And	of	the	four	orders,	the	devotee	who	is	in	full
knowledge	and	is	at	the	same	time	engaged	in	devotional	service	is,	the	Lord
says,	the	best.	By	searching	after	knowledge	one	realizes	that	his	self	is
different	from	his	material	body,	and	when	further	advanced	he	comes	to	the
knowledge	of	impersonal	Brahman	and	Paramātmā.	When	one	is	fully
purified,	he	realizes	that	his	constitutional	position	is	to	be	the	eternal	servant
of	God.	So	by	association	with	pure	devotees,	the	inquisitive,	the	distressed,
the	seeker	after	material	amelioration	and	the	man	in	knowledge	all	become
themselves	pure.	But	in	the	preparatory	stage,	the	man	who	is	in	full
knowledge	of	the	Supreme	Lord	and	is	at	the	same	time	executing	devotionalservice	is	very	dear	to	the	Lord.	He	who	is	situated	in	pure	knowledge	of	the
transcendence	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	God	is	so	protected	in	devotional
service	that	material	contaminations	cannot	touch	him.
TEXT	18
उ द ा र ा ः
	
स व ᆼ
	
ए व ै त े
	
ᇥ ा न ी
	
ᇰ व ा ᇰ म ै व
	
म े
	
म त म ्
	
।
आ ि ᇿ थ त ः
	
स
	
ि ह
	
य ु ᇧ त ा ᇰ म ा
	
म ा म े व ा न ु ሧ म ा ं
	
ग ि त म ्
	
॥
१ ८
॥
udārāḥ	sarva	evaite
jñānī	tv	ātmaiva	me	matam
āsthitaḥ	sa	hi	yuktātmā
mām	evānuttamāṁ	gatim
udārāḥ—
magnanimous;	
sarve—
all;	
eva—
certainly;	
ete—
these;	
jñānī—
one
who	is	in	knowledge;	
tu—
but;	
ātmā	eva—
just	like	Myself;	
me—
Mine;	
matam
—opinion;	
āsthitaḥ—
situated;	
saḥ—
he;	
hi—
certainly;	
yukta-ātmā—
engaged	in
devotional	service;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
eva—
certainly;	
anuttamām—
the	highest
goal;	
gatim—
destination.
TRANSLATION
All	these	devotees	are	undoubtedly	magnanimous	souls,	but	he	who	is
situated	in	knowledge	of	Me	I	consider	verily	to	dwell	in	Me.	Being
engaged	in	My	transcendental	service,	he	attains	Me.
PURPORT
It	is	not	that	other	devotees	who	are	less	complete	in	knowledge	are	not
dear	to	the	Lord.	The	Lord	says	that	all	are	magnanimous	because	anyone	who
comes	to	the	Lord	for	any	purpose	is	called	a	
mahātmā	
or	great	soul.	The
devotees	who	want	some	benefit	out	of	devotional	service	are	accepted	by	the
Lord	because	there	is	an	exchange	of	affection.	Out	of	affection	they	ask	the
Lord	for	some	material	benefit,	and	when	they	get	it	they	become	so	satisfied
that	they	also	advance	in	devotional	service.	But	the	devotee	in	full	knowledge
is	considered	to	be	very	dear	to	the	Lord	because	his	only	purpose	is	to	servethe	Supreme	Lord	with	love	and	devotion.	Such	a	devotee	cannot	live	a
second	without	contacting	or	serving	the	Supreme	Lord.	Similarly,	the
Supreme	Lord	is	very	fond	of	His	devotee	and	cannot	be	separated	from	him.
In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
	(9.4.57),	the	Lord	says:
ahaṁ	bhakta-parādhīno	hy	asvatantra	iva	dvija
sādhubhir	grasta-hṛdayo	bhaktair	bhakta-jana-priyaḥ
"The	devotees	are	always	in	My	heart,	and	I	am	always	in	the	heart	of	the
devotees.	The	devotee	does	not	know	anything	beyond	Me,	and	I	also	cannot
forget	the	devotee.	There	is	a	very	intimate	relationship	between	Me	and	the
pure	devotees.	Pure	devotees	in	full	knowledge	are	never	out	of	spiritual
touch,	and	therefore	they	are	very	much	dear	to	Me."
TEXT	19
ब ह ू न ा ं
	
ज ᇳ म न ा म ᇳ त े
	
ᇥ ा न व ा ᇳ म ा ं
	
प ् र प ሱ त े
	
।
व ा स ु द े व ः
	
स व ᆼ ि म ि त
	
स
	
म ह ा ᇰ म ा
	
स ु द ु ल ᆼ भ ः
	
॥
१ ९
॥
bahūnāṁ	janmanām	ante
jñānavān	māṁ	prapadyate
vāsudevaḥ	sarvam	iti
sa	mahātmā	sudurlabhaḥ
bahūnām—
many;	
janmanām—
births;	
ante—
after;	
jñānavān—
he	possessing
knowledge;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
prapadyate—
surrenders;	
vāsudevaḥ—
cause	of	all
causes;	
sarvam—
all;	
iti—
thus;	
saḥ—
such;	
mahātmā—
great	soul;	
sudurlabhaḥ
—
very	rare.
TRANSLATION
After	many	births	and	deaths,	he	who	is	actually	in	knowledge
surrenders	unto	Me,	knowing	Me	to	be	the	cause	of	all	causes	and	all	that
is.	Such	a	great	soul	is	very	rare.
PURPORTThe	living	entity,	while	executing	devotional	service	or	transcendental
rituals	after	many,	many	births,	may	actually	become	situated	in
transcendental	pure	knowledge	that	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is
the	ultimate	goal	of	spiritual	realization.	In	the	beginning	of	spiritual
realization,	while	one	is	trying	to	give	up	one's	attachment	to	materialism,
there	is	some	leaning	towards	impersonalism,	but	when	one	is	further
advanced	he	can	understand	that	there	are	activities	in	the	spiritual	life	and
that	these	activities	constitute	devotional	service.	Realizing	this,	he	becomes
attached	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	and	surrenders	to	Him.	At
such	a	time	one	can	understand	that	Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa's	mercy	is	everything,	that
He	is	the	cause	of	all	causes	and	that	this	material	manifestation	is	not
independent	from	Him.	He	realizes	the	material	world	to	be	a	perverted
reflection	of	spiritual	variegatedness	and	realizes	that	in	everything	there	is	a
relationship	with	the	Supreme	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.	Thus	he	thinks	of	everything	in
relation	to	Vāsudeva,	or	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.	Such	a	universal	vision	of	Vāsudeva
precipitates	one's	full	surrender	to	the	Supreme	Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	highest
goal.	Such	surrendered	great	souls	are	very	rare.
This	verse	is	very	nicely	explained	in	the	Third	Chapter	of	
Śvetāśvatara
Upaniṣad:	
"In	this	body	there	are	powers	of	speaking,	of	seeing,	of	hearing,	of
mental	activities,	etc.	But	these	are	not	important	if	not	related	to	the	Supreme
Lord.	And	because	Vāsudeva	is	all-pervading	and	everything	is	Vāsudeva,	the
devotee	surrenders	in	full	knowledge."	(Cf.	
Bhagavad-gītā	
7.17	and	11.40)
TEXT	20
क ा म ै ᇿ त ै ᇿ त ै ᇦ ᆼ त ᇥ ा न ा ः
	
प ् र प ሱ ᇳ त े ऽ ᇳ य द े व त ा ः
	
।
त ं
	
त ं
	
ि न य म म ा ᇿ थ ा य
	
प ् र क ृ ᇰ य ा
	
ि न य त ा ः
	
ᇿ व य ा
	
॥
२ ०
॥
kāmais	tais	tair	hṛta-jñānāḥ
prapadyante	'nya-devatāḥ
taṁ	taṁ	niyamam	āsthāya
prakṛtyā	niyatāḥ	svayā
kamaiḥ—
by	desires;	
taiḥ—
by	those;	
taiḥ—
by	those;	
hṛta—
distorted;	
jñānāḥ
—
knowledge;	
prapadyante—
surrender;	
anya—
other;	
devatāḥ—
demigods;	
tam
—
that;	
tam—
that;	
niyamam—
rules;	
āsthāya—
following;	
prakṛtyā	
—by	nature;
niyatāḥ—
controlled;	
svayā—
by	their	own.TRANSLATION
Those	whose	minds	are	distorted	by	material	desires	surrender	unto
demigods	and	follow	the	particular	rules	and	regulations	of	worship
according	to	their	own	natures.
PURPORT
Those	who	are	freed	from	all	material	contaminations	surrender	unto	the
Supreme	Lord	and	engage	in	His	devotional	service.	As	long	as	the	material
contamination	is	not	completely	washed	off,	they	are	by	nature	nondevotees.
But	even	those	who	have	material	desires	and	who	resort	to	the	Supreme	Lord
are	not	so	much	attracted	by	external	nature;	because	of	approaching	the	right
goal,	they	soon	become	free	from	all	material	lust.	In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
it	is	recommended	that	whether	one	is	free	from	all	material	desires,	or	is	full
of	material	desires,	or	desires	liberation	from	material	contamination,	or	is	a
pure	devotee	and	has	no	desire	for	material	sense	gratification,	he	should	in	all
cases	surrender	to	Vāsudeva	and	worship	Him.
It	is	said	in	the	
Bhāgavatam	
that	less	intelligent	people	who	have	lost	their
spiritual	sense	take	shelter	of	demigods	for	immediate	fulfillment	of	material
desires.	Generally,	such	people	do	not	go	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead,	because	they	are	in	particular	modes	of	nature	(ignorance	and
passion)	and	therefore	worship	various	demigods.	Following	the	rules	and
regulations	of	worship,	they	are	satisfied.	The	worshipers	of	demigods	are
motivated	by	small	desires	and	do	not	know	how	to	reach	the	supreme	goal,
but	a	devotee	of	the	Supreme	Lord	is	not	misguided.	Because	in	Vedic
literature	there	are	recommendations	for	worshiping	different	gods	for
different	purposes	(e.g.,	a	diseased	man	is	recommended	to	worship	the	sun),
those	who	are	not	devotees	of	the	Lord	think	that	for	certain	purposes
demigods	are	better	than	the	Supreme	Lord.	But	a	pure	devotee	knows	that	the
Supreme	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	master	of	all.	In	the	
Caitanya-caritāmṛta	
it	is	said
that	only	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	is	master	and	all	others
are	servants.	Therefore	a	pure	devotee	never	goes	to	demigods	for	satisfaction
of	his	material	needs.	He	depends	on	the	Supreme	Lord.	And	the	pure	devotee
is	satisfied	with	whatever	He	gives.
TEXT	21य ो
	
य ो
	
य ा ं
	
य ा ं
	
त न ु ं
	
भ ᇧ त ः
	
श ् र ሬ य ा ि च ᆼ त ु ि म ᇫ छ ि त
	
।
त ᇿ य
	
त ᇿ य ा च ल ा ं
	
श ् र ሬ ा ं
	
त ा म े व
	
ि व द ध ा ᇸ य ह म ्
	
॥
२ १
॥
yo	yo	yāṁ	yāṁ	tanuṁ	bhaktaḥ
śraddhayārcitum	icchati
tasya	tasyācalāṁ	śraddhāṁ
tām	eva	vidadhāmy	aham
yaḥ—
that;	
yaḥ—
that;	
yām
—which;	
yām
—which;	
tanum
—form	of	the
demigods;	
bhaktaḥ—
devotee;	
śraddhayā—
with	faith;	
arcitum
—to	worship;
icchati—
desires;	
tasya
—of	that;	
tasya
—of	that;	
acalām—
steady;	
śraddhām—
faith;	
tam
—him;	
eva
—surely;	
vidadhāmi—
give;	
aham—
I.
TRANSLATION
I	am	in	everyone's	heart	as	the	Supersoul.	As	soon	as	one	desires	to
worship	the	demigods,	I	make	his	faith	steady	so	that	he	can	devote
himself	to	some	particular	deity.
PURPORT
God	has	given	independence	to	everyone;	therefore,	if	a	person	desires	to
have	material	enjoyment	and	wants	very	sincerely	to	have	such	facilities	from
the	material	demigods,	the	Supreme	Lord,	as	Supersoul	in	everyone's	heart,
understands	and	gives	facilities	to	such	persons.	As	the	supreme	father	of	all
living	entities,	He	does	not	interfere	with	their	independence,	but	gives	all
facilities	so	that	they	can	fulfill	their	material	desires.	Some	may	ask	why	the
all-powerful	God	gives	facilities	to	the	living	entities	for	enjoying	this
material	world	and	so	lets	them	fall	into	the	trap	of	the	illusory	energy.	The
answer	is	that	if	the	Supreme	Lord	as	Supersoul	does	not	give	such	facilities,
then	there	is	no	meaning	to	independence.	Therefore	He	gives	everyone	full
independence
—
whatever	one	likes
—
but	His	ultimate	instruction	we	find	in	the
Bhagavad-gītā:	
man	should	give	up	all	other	engagements	and	fully	surrender
unto	Him.	That	will	make	man	happy.
Both	the	living	entity	and	the	demigods	are	subordinate	to	the	will	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead;	therefore	the	living	entity	cannot	worship
the	demigod	by	his	own	desire,	nor	can	the	demigod	bestow	any	benedictionwithout	the	supreme	will.	As	it	is	said,	not	a	blade	of	grass	moves	without	the
will	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Generally,	persons	who	are
distressed	in	the	material	world	go	to	the	demigods,	as	they	are	advised	in	the
Vedic	literature.	A	person	wanting	some	particular	thing	may	worship	such
and	such	a	demigod.	For	example,	a	diseased	person	is	recommended	to
worship	the	sun-god;	a	person	wanting	education	may	worship	the	goddess	of
learning,	Sarasvatī;	and	a	person	wanting	a	beautiful	wife	may	worship	the
goddess	Umā,	the	wife	of	Lord	Śiva.	In	this	way	there	are	recommendations	in
the	
śāstras
	(Vedic	scriptures)	for	different	modes	of	worship	of	different
demigods.	And	because	a	particular	living	entity	wants	to	enjoy	a	particular
material	facility,	the	Lord	inspires	him	with	a	strong	desire	to	achieve	that
benediction	from	that	particular	demigod,	and	so	he	successfully	receives	the
benediction.	The	particular	mode	of	the	devotional	attitude	of	the	living	entity
toward	a	particular	type	of	demigod	is	also	arranged	by	the	Supreme	Lord.
The	demigods	cannot	infuse	the	living	entities	with	such	an	affinity,	but
because	He	is	the	Supreme	Lord	or	the	Supersoul	who	is	present	in	the	heart
of	all	living	entities,	Kṛṣṇa	gives	impetus	to	man	to	worship	certain	demigods.
The	demigods	are	actually	different	parts	of	the	universal	body	of	the	Supreme
Lord;	therefore	they	have	no	independence.	In	the	Vedic	literature	
(Taittirīya
Upaniṣad,	
First	
Anuvāka)	
it	is	stated:	"The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead
as	Supersoul	is	also	present	within	the	heart	of	the	demigod;	therefore	He
arranges	through	the	demigod	to	fulfill	the	desire	of	the	living	entity.	But	both
the	demigod	and	the	living	entity	are	dependent	on	the	supreme	wil1.	They	are
not	independent."
TEXT	22
स
	
त य ा
	
श ् र ሬ य ा
	
य ु ᇧ त ᇿ त ᇿ य ा र ा ध न म ी ह त े
	
।
ल भ त े
	
च
	
त त ः
	
क ा म ा ᇳ म य ै व
	
ि व ि ह त ा ि ᇳ ह त ा न ्
	
॥
२ २
॥
sa	tayā	śraddhayā	yuktas
tasyārādhanam	īhate
labhate	ca	tataḥ	kāmān
mayaiva	vihitān	hi	tān
saḥ—
he;	
tayā—
with	that;	
śraddhayā—
with	faith;	
yuktaḥ—
endowed;	
tasya
—
his;	
ārādhanam—
worship;	
īhate—
seeks;	
labhate—
obtains;	
ca—
and;	
tataḥ—
from	which;	
kāmān—
desires;	
mayā—
by	Me;	
eva—
alone;	
vihitān—
regulated;	
hi—
for;	
tān—
those.
TRANSLATION
Endowed	with	such	a	faith,	he	seeks	favors	of	a	particular	demigod	and
obtains	his	desires.	But	in	actuality	these	benefits	are	bestowed	by	Me
alone.
PURPORT
The	demigods	cannot	award	benediction	to	the	devotees	without	the
permission	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	The	living	entity	may	forget	that	everything
is	the	property	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	but	the	demigods	do	not	forget.	So	the
worship	of	demigods	and	achievement	of	desired	results	are	not	due	to	the
demigods	but	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	by	arrangement.	The
less	intelligent	living	entity	does	not	know	this,	and	therefore	he	foolishly
goes	to	the	demigods	for	some	benefit.	But	the	pure	devotee,	when	in	need	of
something,	prays	only	to	the	Supreme	Lord.	Asking	for	material	benefit,
however,	is	not	a	sign	of	a	pure	devotee.	A	living	entity	goes	to	the	demigods
usually	because	he	is	mad	to	fulfill	his	lust.	This	happens	when	something
undue	is	desired	by	the	living	entity,	and	the	Lord	Himself	does	not	fulfill	the
desire.	In	the	
Caitanya-caritāmṛta	
it	is	said	that	one	who	worships	the
Supreme	Lord	and	at	the	same	time	desires	material	enjoyment	is
contradictory	in	his	desires.	Devotional	service	of	the	Supreme	Lord	and	the
worship	of	a	demigod	cannot	be	on	the	same	platform	because	worship	of	a
demigod	is	material	and	devotional	service	to	the	Supreme	Lord	is	completely
spiritual.
For	the	living	entity	who	desires	to	return	to	Godhead,	material	desires	are
impediments.	A	pure	devotee	of	the	Lord	is	therefore	not	awarded	the	material
benefits	desired	by	less	intelligent	living	entities	who	prefer	to	worship
demigods	of	the	material	world	rather	than	engage	in	devotional	service	of	the
Supreme	Lord.
TEXT	23
अ ᇳ त व ሧ ु
	
फ ल ं
	
त े ष ा ं
	
त द ् भ व ᇰ य ᇺ प म े ध स ा म ्
	
।द े व ा ᇳ द े व य ज ो
	
य ा ि ᇳ त
	
म द ् भ ᇧ त ा
	
य ा ि ᇳ त
	
म ा म ि प
	
॥
२ ३
॥
antavat	tu	phalaṁ	teṣāṁ
tad	bhavaty	alpa-medhasām
devān	deva-yajo	yānti
mad-bhaktā	yānti	mām	api
antavat	tu—
limited	and	temporary;	
phalam—
fruits;	
teṣām—
their;	
tat—	
that;
bhavati—
becomes;	
alpa-medhasām—
of	those	of	small	intelligence;	
devān
—
demigods'	planets;	
deva-yajaḥ—
worshipers	of	demigods;	
yānti—	
achieve;
mat—
My;	
bhaktāḥ—
devotees;	
yānti—
attain;	
mām
—unto	Me;	
api—	
surely.
TRANSLATION
Men	of	small	intelligence	worship	the	demigods,	and	their	fruits	are
limited	and	temporary.	Those	who	worship	the	demigods	go	to	the	planets
of	the	demigods,	but	My	devotees	ultimately	reach	My	supreme	planet.
PURPORT
Some	commentators	on	the	
Gītā
	say	that	one	who	worships	a	demigod	can
reach	the	Supreme	Lord,	but	here	it	is	clearly	stated	that	the	worshipers	of
demigods	go	to	the	different	planetary	systems	where	various	demigods	are
situated,	just	as	a	worshiper	of	the	sun	achieves	the	sun	or	a	worshiper	of	the
demigod	of	the	moon	achieves	the	moon.	Similarly,	if	anyone	wants	to
worship	a	demigod	like	Indra,	he	can	attain	that	particular	god's	planet.	It	is
not	that	everyone,	regardless	of	whatever	demigod	is	worshiped,	will	reach	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	That	is	denied	here,	for	it	is	clearly	stated
that	the	worshipers	of	demigods	go	to	different	planets	in	the	material	world,
but	the	devotee	of	the	Supreme	Lord	goes	directly	to	the	supreme	planet	of	the
Personality	of	Godhead.
Here	the	point	may	be	raised	that	if	the	demigods	are	different	parts	of	the
body	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	then	the	same	end	should	be	achieved	by
worshiping	them.	However,	worshipers	of	the	demigods	are	less	intelligent
because	they	don't	know	to	what	part	of	the	body	food	must	be	supplied.
Some	of	them	are	so	foolish	that	they	claim	that	there	are	many	parts	and
many	ways	to	supply	food.	This	isn't	very	sanguine.	Can	anyone	supply	foodto	the	body	through	the	ears	or	eyes?	They	do	not	know	that	these	demigods
are	different	parts	of	the	universal	body	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	and	in	their
ignorance	they	believe	that	each	and	every	demigod	is	a	separate	God	and	a
competitor	of	the	Supreme	Lord.
Not	only	are	demigods	parts	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	but	ordinary	living
entities	are	also.	In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
it	is	stated	that	the	
brāhmaṇas	
are
the	head	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	the	
kṣatriyas	
are	the	arms,	etc.,	and	that	all
serve	different	functions.	Regardless	of	the	situation,	if	one	knows	that	both
the	demigods	and	himself	are	part	and	parcel	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	his
knowledge	is	perfect.	But	if	he	does	not	understand	this,	he	achieves	different
planets	where	the	demigods	reside.	This	is	not	the	same	destination	the
devotee	reaches.
The	results	achieved	by	the	demigods'	benedictions	are	perishable	because
within	this	material	world	the	planets,	the	demigods	and	their	worshipers	are
all	perishable.	Therefore	it	is	clearly	stated	in	this	verse	that	all	results
achieved	by	worshiping	demigods	are	perishable,	and	therefore	such	worship
is	performed	by	the	less	intelligent	living	entity.	Because	the	pure	devotee
engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	in	devotional	service	of	the	Supreme	Lord
achieves	eternal	blissful	existence	that	is	full	of	knowledge,	his	achievements
and	those	of	the	common	worshiper	of	the	demigods	are	different.	The
Supreme	Lord	is	unlimited;	His	favor	is	unlimited;	His	mercy	is	unlimited.
Therefore	the	mercy	of	the	Supreme	Lord	upon	His	pure	devotees	is
unlimited.
TEXT	24
अ ᇼ य ᇧ त ं
	
ᇼ य ि ᇧ त म ा प ᇳ न ं
	
म ᇳ य ᇳ त े
	
म ा म ब ु ሬ य ः
	
।
प र ं
	
भ ा व म ज ा न ᇳ त ो
	
म म ा ᇼ य य म न ु ሧ म म ्
	
॥
२ ४
॥
avyaktaṁ	vyaktim	āpannaṁ
manyante	mām	abuddhayaḥ
paraṁ	bhāvam	ajānanto
mamāvyayam	anuttamam
avyaktam—
nonmanifested;	
vyaktim—
personality;	
āpannam—
achieved;
manyante—
think;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
abuddhayaḥ—
less	intelligent	persons;
param—
supreme;	
bhāvam—
state	of	being;	
ajānantaḥ—
without	knowing;mama—
My;
	avyayam—
imperishable;	
anuttamam—
the	finest.
TRANSLATION
Unintelligent	men,	who	know	Me	not,	think	that	I	have	assumed	this
form	and	personality.	Due	to	their	small	knowledge,	they	do	not	know	My
higher	nature,	which	is	changeless	and	supreme.
PURPORT
Those	who	are	worshipers	of	demigods	have	been	described	as	less
intelligent	persons,	and	here	the	impersonalists	are	similarly	described.	Lord
Kṛṣṇa	in	His	personal	form	is	here	speaking	before	Arjuna,	and	still,	due	to
ignorance,	impersonalists	argue	that	the	Supreme	Lord	ultimately	has	no	form.
Yāmunācārya,	a	great	devotee	of	the	Lord	in	the	disciplic	succession	from
Rāmānujācārya,	has	written	two	very	appropriate	verses	in	this	connection.	He
says,	"My	dear	Lord,	devotees	like	Vyāsadeva	and	Nārada	know	You	to	be	the
Personality	of	Godhead.	By	understanding	different	Vedic	literatures,	one	can
come	to	know	Your	characteristics,	Your	form	and	Your	activities,	and	one	can
thus	understand	that	You	are	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	But	those
who	are	in	the	modes	of	passion	and	ignorance,	the	demons,	the	nondevotees,
cannot	understand	You.	They	are	unable	to	understand	You.	However	expert
such	nondevotees	may	be	in	discussing	
Vedānta	
and	the	
Upaniṣads
	and	other
Vedic	literatures,	it	is	not	possible	for	them	to	understand	the	Personality	of
Godhead."
In	the	
Brahma-saṁhitā	
it	is	stated	that	the	Personality	of	Godhead	cannot
be	understood	simply	by	study	of	the	
Vedānta	
literature.	Only	by	the	mercy	of
the	Supreme	Lord	can	the	Personality	of	the	Supreme	be	known.	Therefore	in
this	verse	it	is	clearly	stated	that	not	only	the	worshipers	of	the	demigods	are
less	intelligent,	but	those	nondevotees	who	are	engaged	in	
Vedānta	
and
speculation	on	Vedic	literature	without	any	tinge	of	true	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness
are	also	less	intelligent,	and	for	them	it	is	not	possible	to	understand	God's
personal	nature.	Persons	who	are	under	the	impression	that	the	Absolute	Truth
is	impersonal	are	described	as	
asuras
,	which	means	one	who	does	not	know
the	ultimate	feature	of	the	Absolute	Truth.	In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
it	is
stated	that	supreme	realization	begins	from	the	impersonal	Brahman	and	then
rises	to	the	localized	Supersoul
—
but	the	ultimate	word	in	the	Absolute	Truthis	the	Personality	of	Godhead.	Modern	impersonalists	are	still	less	intelligent,
for	they	do	not	even	follow	their	great	predecessor,	Śaṅkarācārya,	who	has
specifically	stated	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.
Impersonalists,	therefore,	not	knowing	the	Supreme	Truth,	think	Kṛṣṇa	to	be
only	the	son	of	Devakī	and	Vasudeva,	or	a	prince,	or	a	powerful	living	entity.
This	is	also	condemned	in	
Bhagavad-gītā:	
"Only	the	fools	regard	Me	as	an
ordinary	person."	The	fact	is	that	no	one	can	understand	Kṛṣṇa	without
rendering	devotional	service	and	without	developing	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
The	
Gītā
	confirms	this.
One	cannot	understand	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	or	His
form,	quality	or	name	simply	by	mental	speculation	or	by	discussing	Vedic
literature.	One	must	understand	Him	by	devotional	service.	When	one	is	fully
engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	beginning	by	chanting	the	
mahāmantra
—
Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/Hare	Rāma,	Hare	Rāma,
Rāma	Rāma,	Hare	Hare—then	only	can	one	understand	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.	Nondevotee	impersonalists	think	that	Kṛṣṇa	has	a
body	made	of	this	material	nature	and	that	all	His	activities,	His	form	and
everything,	are	
māyā
.	These	impersonalists	are	known	as	Māyāvādī.	They	do
not	know	the	ultimate	truth.
The	twentieth	verse	clearly	states:	"Those	who	are	blinded	by	lusty	desires
surrender	unto	the	different	demigods."	It	is	accepted	that	besides	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	there	are	demigods	who	have	theirdifferent	planets
(Bg.	7.23),	and	the	Lord	also	has	a	planet.	It	is	also	stated	that	the	worshipers
of	the	demigods	go	to	the	different	planets	of	the	demigods,	and	those	who	are
devotees	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	go	to	the	Kṛṣṇaloka	planet.	Although	this	is	clearly
stated,	the	foolish	impersonalists	still	maintain	that	the	Lord	is	formless	and
that	these	forms	are	impositions.	From	the	study	of	the	
Gītā
	does	it	appear	that
the	demigods	and	their	abodes	are	impersonal?	Clearly,	neither	the	demigods
nor	Kṛṣṇa,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	are	impersonal.	They	are	all
persons;	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	and	He	has	His
own	planet,	and	the	demigods	have	theirs.
Therefore	the	monistic	contention	that	ultimate	truth	is	formless	and	that
form	is	imposed	does	not	hold	true.	It	is	clearly	stated	here	that	it	is	not
imposed.	From	the	
Gītā	
we	can	clearly	understand	that	the	forms	of	the
demigods	and	the	form	of	the	Supreme	Lord	are	simultaneously	existing	and
that	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	
sac-cid-ānanda,	
eternal	blissful	knowledge.	The	
Vedas	
also
confirm	that	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth	is	
ānandamaya,	
or	full	of	blissful
pleasure,	and	that	He	is	
abhyāsāt,	
by	nature	the	reservoir	of	unlimitedauspicious	qualities.	And	in	the	
Gītā	
the	Lord	says	that	although	He	is	
aja
(unborn),	He	still	appears.	These	are	the	facts	that	we	should	understand	from
the	
Gītā.	
We	cannot	understand	how	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	can
be	impersonal;	the	imposition	theory	of	the	impersonalist	monist	is	false	as	far
as	the	statements	of	the	
Gītā	
are	concerned.	It	is	clear	herein	that	the	Supreme
Absolute	Truth,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	has	both	form	and	personality.
TEXT	25
न ा ह ं
	
प ् र क ा श ः
	
स व ᆼ ᇿ य
	
य ो ग म ा य ा स म ा व ृ त ः
	
।
म ू ढ ो ऽ य ं
	
न ा ि भ ज ा न ा ि त
	
ल ो क ो
	
म ा म ज म ᇼ य य म ्
	
॥
२ ५
॥
nāhaṁ	prakāśaḥ	sarvasya
yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ
mūḍho	'yaṁ	nābhijānāti
loko	mām	ajam	avyayam
na—
nor;	
aham—
I;
	prakāśaḥ—
manifest;	
sarvasya—
to	everyone;	
yoga-māyā
—internal	potency;	
samāvṛtaḥ—
covered;	
mūḍhaḥ—
foolish;	
ayam—
this;	
na—
not
;
	abhijānāti—
can	understand;	
lokaḥ—
such	less	intelligent	persons;	
mām—
Me;	
ajam—
unborn;	
avyayam—
inexhaustible.
TRANSLATION
I	am	never	manifest	to	the	foolish	and	unintelligent.	For	them	I	am
covered	by	My	eternal	creative	potency	[yoga-māyā];	and	so	the	deluded
world	knows	Me	not,	who	am	unborn	and	infallible.
PURPORT
It	may	be	argued	that	since	Kṛṣṇa	was	present	on	this	earth	and	was	visible
to	everyone,	then	why	isn't	He	manifest	to	everyone	now?	But	actually	He
was	not	manifest	to	everyone.	When	Kṛṣṇa	was	present	there	were	only	a	few
people	who	could	understand	Him	to	be	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.
In	the	assembly	of	Kurus,	when	Śiśupāla	spoke	against	Kṛṣṇa	being	elected
president	of	the	assembly,	Bhīṣma	supported	Him	and	proclaimed	Him	to	bethe	Supreme	God.	Similarly,	the	Pāṇḍavas	and	a	few	others	knew	that	He	was
the	Supreme,	but	not	everyone.	He	was	not	revealed	to	the	nondevotees	and
the	common	man.	Therefore	in	the	
Gītā
	Kṛṣṇa	says	that	but	for	His	pure
devotees,	all	men	consider	Him	to	be	like	themselves.	He	was	manifest	only	to
His	devotees	as	the	reservoir	of	all	pleasure.	But	to	others,	to	unintelligent
nondevotees,	He	was	covered	by	His	eternal	potency.
In	the	prayers	of	Kuntī	in	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
	(1.8.18),	it	is	said	that
the	Lord	is	covered	by	the	curtain	of	
yoga-māyā
	and	thus	ordinary	people
cannot	understand	Him.	Kuntī	prays:	"O	my	Lord,	You	are	the	maintainer	of
the	entire	universe,	and	devotional	service	to	You	is	the	highest	religious
principle.	Therefore,	I	pray	that	You	will	also	maintain	me.	Your
transcendental	form	is	covered	by	the	
yoga-māyā
.	The	
brahmajyoti
	is	the
covering	of	the	internal	potency.	May	You	kindly	remove	this	glowing
effulgence	that	impedes	my	seeing	Your	
sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha
,	Your	eternal
form	of	bliss	and	knowledge."
This	yoga-māyā	curtain	is	also	mentioned	in	the	Fifteenth	Chapter	of	the
Gītā.	The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	in	His	transcendental	form	of	bliss
and	knowledge	is	covered	by	the	eternal	potency	of	
brahmajyoti
	and	the	less
intelligent	impersonalists	cannot	see	the	Supreme	on	this	account.	Also	in	the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
	(10.14.7)	there	is	this	prayer	by	Brahmā:	"O	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	O	Supersoul,	O	master	of	all	mystery,	who	can
calculate	Your	potency	and	pastimes	in	this	world?	You	are	always	expanding
Your	eternal	potency,	and	therefore	no	one	can	understand	You.	Learned
scientists	and	learned	scholars	can	examine	the	atomic	constitution	of	the
material	world	or	even	the	planets,	but	still	they	are	unable	to	calculate	Your
energy	and	potency,	although	You	are	present	before	them."	The	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	is	not	only	unborn,	but	He	is	
avyaya
,
inexhaustible.	His	eternal	form	is	bliss	and	knowledge,	and	His	energies	are
all	inexhaustible.
TEXT	26
व े द ा ह ं
	
स म त ी त ा ि न
	
व त ᆼ म ा न ा ि न
	
च ा ज ु ᆼ न
	
।
भ ि व ᇾ य ा ि ण
	
च
	
भ ू त ा ि न
	
म ा ं
	
त ु
	
व े द
	
न
	
क ᇽ च न
	
॥
२ ६
॥
vedāhaṁ	samatītāni
vartamānāni	cārjunabhaviṣyāṇi	ca	bhūtāni
māṁ	tu	veda	na	kaścana
veda—
know;	
aham—
I;
	sama—
equally;	
atītāni—
past;	
vartamānāni
—
present;	
ca—
and;	
arjuna
—O	Arjuna;	
bhaviṣyāṇi—
future;	
ca—
also;	
bhūtāni
—	
living	entities;	
mām—
Me;	
tu—
but;	
veda—
knows;	
na—
not;	
kaścana
—
anyone.
TRANSLATION
O	Arjuna,	as	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	I	know	everything
that	has	happened	in	the	past,	all	that	is	happening	in	the	present,	and	all
things	that	are	yet	to	come.	I	also	know	all	living	entities;	but	Me	no	one
knows.
PURPORT
Here	the	question	of	personality	and	impersonality	is	clearly	stated.	If
Kṛṣṇa,	the	form	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	is	considered	by	the
impersonalists	to	be	
māyā
,	to	be	material,	then	He	would,	like	the	living
entity,	change	His	body	and	forget	everything	in	His	past	life.	Anyone	with	a
material	body	cannot	remember	his	past	life,	nor	can	he	foretell	his	future	life,
nor	can	he	predict	the	outcome	of	his	present	life;	therefore	he	cannot	know
what	is	happening	in	past,	present	and	future.	Unless	one	is	liberated	from
material	contamination,	he	cannot	know	past,	present	and	future.
Unlike	the	ordinary	human	being,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	clearly	says	that	He
completely	knows	what	happened	in	the	past,	what	is	happening	in	the
present,	and	what	will	happen	in	the	future.	In	the	Fourth	Chapter	we	have
seen	that	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	remembers	instructing	Vivasvān,	the	sun-god,	millions
of	years	ago.	Kṛṣṇa	knows	every	living	entity	because	He	is	situated	in	every
living	being's	heart	as	the	Supreme	Soul.	But	despite	His	presence	in	every
living	entity	as	Supersoul	and	His	presence	beyond	the	material	sky,	as	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	the	less	intelligent	cannot	realize	Him	as	the
Supreme	Person.	Certainly	the	transcendental	body	of	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	is	not
perishable.	He	is	just	like	the	sun,	and	
mayā
	is	like	the	cloud.	In	the	material
world	we	can	see	that	there	is	the	sun	and	that	there	are	clouds	and	different
stars	and	planets.	The	clouds	may	cover	all	these	in	the	sky	temporarily,	butthis	covering	is	only	apparent	to	our	limited	vision.	The	sun,	moon	and	stars
are	not	actually	covered.	Similarly,	
māyā
	cannot	cover	the	Supreme	Lord.	By
His	internal	potency	He	is	not	manifest	to	the	less	intelligent	class	of	men.	As
it	is	stated	in	the	third	verse	of	this	chapter,	out	of	millions	and	millions	of
men,	some	try	to	become	perfect	in	this	human	form	of	life,	and	out	of
thousands	and	thousands	of	such	perfected	men,	hardly	one	can	understand
what	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is.	Even	if	one	is	perfected	by	realization	of	impersonal
Brahman	or	localized	Paramātmā,	he	cannot	possibly	understand	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa,	without	being	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
TEXT	27
इ ᇫ छ ा ሲ े ष स म ु ᇰ थ े न
	
ሲ ᇳ ሲ म ो ह े न
	
भ ा र त
	
।
स व ᆼ भ ू त ा ि न
	
स ᇸ म ो ह ं
	
स ग ᆹ
	
य ा ि ᇳ त
	
प र ᇳ त प
	
॥
२ ७
॥
icchā-dveṣa-samutthena
dvandva-mohena	bhārata
sarva-bhūtāni	sammohaṁ
sarge	yānti	parantapa
icchā—
desire;	
dveṣa—
hate;	
samutthena—
born;	
dvandva—
duality;	
mohena
—overcome;	
bhārata
—O	scion	of	Bharata;	
sarva
—all;	
bhūtāni
—living
entities;	
sammoham—
into	delusion;	
sarge
—in	creation;	
yānti
—go;	
parantapa
—
O	conquerer	of	enemies.
TRANSLATION
O	scion	of	Bharata	[Arjuna],	O	conquerer	of	the	foe,	all	living	entities
are	born	into	delusion,	overcome	by	the	dualities	of	desire	and	hate.
PURPORT
The	real	constitutional	position	of	the	living	entity	is	that	of	subordination
to	the	Supreme	Lord,	who	is	pure	knowledge.	When	one	is	deluded	into
separation	from	this	pure	knowledge,	he	becomes	controlled	by	illusory
energy	and	cannot	understand	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Theillusory	energy	is	manifested	in	the	duality	of	desire	and	hate.	Due	to	desire
and	hate,	the	ignorant	person	wants	to	become	one	with	the	Supreme	Lord	and
envies	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Pure	devotees,	who	are
not	so	deluded	or	contaminated	by	desire	and	hate,	can	understand	that	Lord
Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	appears	by	His	internal	potencies,	but	those	who	are	deluded	by
duality	and	nescience	think	that	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is
created	by	material	energies.	This	is	their	misfortune.	Such	deluded	persons,
symptomatically,	dwell	in	dualities	of	dishonor	and	honor,	misery	and
happiness,	woman	and	man,	good	and	bad,	pleasure	and	pain,	etc.,	thinking,
"This	is	my	wife;	this	is	my	house;	I	am	the	master	of	this	house;	I	am	the
husband	of	this	wife."	These	are	the	dualities	of	delusion.	Those	who	are	so
deluded	by	dualities	are	completely	foolish	and	therefore	cannot	understand
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.
TEXT	28
य े ष ा ं
	
ᇰ व ᇳ त ग त ं
	
प ा प ं
	
ज न ा न ा ं
	
प ु ᇯ य क म ᆼ ण ा म ्
	
।
त े
	
ሲ ᇳ ሲ म ो ह ि न म ु ᆼ ᇧ त ा
	
भ ज ᇳ त े
	
म ा ं
	
द ृ ढ व ् र त ा ः
	
॥
२ ८
॥
yeṣāṁ	tv	anta-gataṁ	pāpaṁ
janānāṁ	puṇya-karmaṇām
te	dvandva-moha-nirmuktā
bhajante	māṁ	dṛḍha-vratāḥ
yeṣām—
whose;	
tu—
but;	
anta-gatam
—completely	eradicated;	
pāpam—
sin;
janānām—
of	the	persons;	
puṇya—
pious;	
karmaṇām—
previous	activities;	
te
—
they;	
dvandva—
duality;	
moha—
delusion
;	nirmuktāḥ—
free	from;	
bhajante
—worship;	
mām—
Me;	
dṛḍha-vratāḥ—
with	determination.
TRANSLATION
Persons	who	have	acted	piously	in	previous	lives	and	in	this	life,	whose
sinful	actions	are	completely	eradicated	and	who	are	freed	from	the
duality	of	delusion,	engage	themselves	in	My	service	with	determination.
PURPORTThose	eligible	for	elevation	to	the	transcendental	position	are	mentioned	in
this	verse.	For	those	who	are	sinful,	atheistic,	foolish	and	deceitful,	it	is	very
difficult	to	transcend	the	duality	of	desire	and	hate.	Only	those	who	have
passed	their	lives	in	practicing	the	regulative	principles	of	religion,	who	have
acted	piously	and	have	conquered	sinful	reactions	can	accept	devotional
service	and	gradually	rise	to	the	pure	knowledge	of	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead.	Then,	gradually,	they	can	meditate	in	trance	on	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.	That	is	the	process	of	being	situated	on	the	spiritual
platform.	This	elevation	is	possible	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	in	the	association
of	pure	devotees	who	can	deliver	one	from	delusion.
It	is	stated	in	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
that	if	one	actually	wants	to	be
liberated	he	must	render	service	to	the	devotees;	but	one	who	associates	with
materialistic	people	is	on	the	path	leading	to	the	darkest	region	of	existence.
All	the	devotees	of	the	Lord	traverse	this	earth	just	to	recover	the	conditioned
souls	from	their	delusion.	The	impersonalists	do	not	know	that	forgetting	their
constitutional	position	as	subordinate	to	the	Supreme	Lord	is	the	greatest
violation	of	God's	law.	Unless	one	is	reinstated	in	his	own	constitutional
position,	it	is	not	possible	to	understand	the	Supreme	Personality	or	to	be	fully
engaged	in	His	transcendental	loving	service	with	determination.
TEXT	29
ज र ा म र ण म ो ᇤ ा य
	
म ा म ा ि श ् र ᇰ य
	
य त ि ᇳ त
	
य े
	
।
त े
	
ब ् र ቊ
	
त द ् ि व द ु ः
	
क ृ ᇰ ᇿ न म ᇲ य ा ᇰ म ं
	
क म ᆼ
	
च ा ि ख ल म ्
	
॥
२ ९
॥
jarā-maraṇa-mokṣāya
mām	āśritya	yatanti	ye
te	brahma	tad	viduḥ	kṛtsnam
adhyātmaṁ	karma	cākhilam
jarā—
old	age;	
maraṇa—
death;	
mokṣāya—
for	the	purpose	of	liberation;
mām—
unto	Me;	
āśritya—
taking	shelter	of;	
yatanti—
endeavor;	
ye—
all	those;
te—
such	persons;	
brahma—
Brahman;	
tat—
actually	that;	
viduḥ—
they	know;
kṛtsnam—
everything;	
adhyātmam—
transcendental;	
karma
—fruitive	activities;
ca
—also;	
akhilam—
entirely.
TRANSLATIONIntelligent	persons	who	are	endeavoring	for	liberation	from	old	age	and
death	take	refuge	in	Me	in	devotional	service.	They	are	actually	Brahman
because	they	entirely	know	everything	about	transcendental	and	fruitive
activities.
PURPORT
Birth,	death,	old	age	and	diseases	affect	this	material	body,	but	not	the
spiritual	body.	There	is	no	birth,	death,	old	age	and	disease	for	the	spiritual
body,	so	one	who	attains	a	spiritual	body,	becomes	one	of	the	associates	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	and	engages	in	eternal	devotional	service,	is
really	liberated.	
Ahaṁ	brahmāsmi:	
I	am	spirit.	It	is	said	that	one	should
understand	that	he	is	Brahman—spirit	soul.	This	Brahman	conception	of	life
is	also	in	devotional	service,	as	described	in	this	verse.	The	pure	devotees	are
transcendentally	situated	on	the	Brahman	platform,	and	they	know	everything
about	transcendental	and	material	activities.
Four	kinds	of	impure	devotees	who	engage	themselves	in	the	transcendental
service	of	the	Lord	achieve	their	respective	goals,	and	by	the	grace	of	the
Supreme	Lord,	when	they	are	fully	Kṛṣṇa	conscious,	they	actually	enjoy
spiritual	association	with	the	Supreme	Lord.	But	those	who	are	worshipers	of
demigods	never	reach	the	Supreme	Lord	in	His	supreme	planet.	Even	the	less
intelligent	Brahman-realized	persons	cannot	reach	the	supreme	planet	of
Kṛṣṇa	known	as	Goloka	Vṛndāvana.	Only	persons	who	perform	activities	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	(
mām	āśritya
)are	actually	entitled	to	be	called	Brahman,
because	they	are	actually	endeavoring	to	reach	the	Kṛṣṇa	planet.	Such	persons
have	no	misgivings	about	Kṛṣṇa,	and	thus	they	are	factually	Brahman.
Those	who	are	engaged	in	worshiping	the	form	or	
arcā
	of	the	Lord	or	who
are	engaged	in	meditation	on	the	Lord	simply	for	liberation	from	material
bondage,	also	know,	by	the	grace	of	the	Lord,	the	purports	of	Brahman,
adhibhūta,	
etc.,	as	explained	by	the	Lord	in	the	next	chapter.
TEXT	30
स ा ि ध भ ू त ा ि ध द ै व ं
	
म ा ं
	
स ा ि ध य ᇥ ं
	
च
	
य े
	
ि व द ु ः
	
।
प ् र य ा ण क ा ल े ऽ ि प
	
च
	
म ा ं
	
त े
	
ि व द ु य ु ᆼ ᇧ त च े त स ः
	
॥
३ ०
॥sādhib	hūtādhidaivaṁ	māṁ
sādhiyajñaṁ	ca	ye	viduḥ
prayāṇa-kāle	'pi	ca	māṁ
te	vidur	yukta-cetasaḥ
sa-adhibhūta—
the	governing	principle	of	the	material	manifestation;
adhidaivam—
underlying	all	the	demigods;	
mām—
Me;	
sa-adhiyajñam
—
sustaining	all	sacrifices;	
ca—
and;	
ye—
those;	
viduḥ—
know;	
prayāṇa—
of
death;	
kāle—
at	the	time;	
api—
even;	
ca—
and;	
mām
—Me;	
te—
they;	
viduḥ
—
know;	
yukta-cetasaḥ—
with	steadfast	mind.
TRANSLATION
Those	who	know	Me	as	the	Supreme	Lord,	as	the	governing	principle
of	the	material	manifestation,	who	know	Me	as	the	one	underlying	all	the
demigods	and	as	the	one	sustaining	all	sacrifices,	can,	with	steadfast
mind,	understand	and	know	Me	even	at	the	time	of	death.
PURPORT
Persons	acting	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	are	never	entirely	deviated	from	the
path	of	understanding	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	In	the
transcendental	association	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	one	can	understand	how
the	Supreme	Lord	is	the	governing	principle	of	the	material	manifestation	and
even	of	the	demigods.	Gradually,	by	such	transcendental	association,	one
becomes	convinced	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	Himself,	and	at
the	time	of	death	such	a	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	can	never	forget	Kṛṣṇa.
Naturally	he	is	thus	promoted	to	the	planet	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	Goloka
Vṛndāvana.
This	Seventh	Chapter	particularly	explains	how	one	can	become	a	fully
Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person.	The	beginning	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	association
of	persons	who	are	Kṛṣṇa	conscious.	Such	association	is	spiritual	and	puts	one
directly	in	touch	with	the	Supreme	Lord,	and,	by	His	grace,	one	can
understand	Kṛṣṇa	to	be	the	Supreme	God.	At	the	same	time	one	can	really
understand	the	constitutional	position	of	the	living	entity	and	how	the	living
entity	forgets	Kṛṣṇa	and	becomes	entangled	in	material	activities.	By	gradual
development	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	in	good	association,	the	living	entity	canunderstand	that	due	to	forgetfulness	of	Kṛṣṇa	he	has	become	conditioned	by
the	laws	of	material	nature.	He	can	also	understand	that	this	human	form	of
life	is	an	opportunity	to	regain	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	that	it	should	be	fully
utilized	to	attain	the	causeless	mercy	of	the	Supreme	Lord.
Many	subjects	have	been	discussed	in	this	chapter:	the	man	in	distress,	the
inquisitive	man,	the	man	in	want	of	material	necessities,	knowledge	of
Brahman,	knowledge	of	Paramātmā,	liberation	from	birth,	death	and	diseases,
and	worship	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	However,	he	who	is	actually	elevated	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	does	not	care	for	the	different	processes.	He	simply
directly	engages	himself	in	activities	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	thereby
factually	attains	his	constitutional	position	as	eternal	servitor	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.
In	such	a	situation	he	takes	pleasure	in	hearing	and	glorifying	the	Supreme
Lord	in	pure	devotional	service.	He	is	convinced	that	by	doing	so,	all	his
objectives	will	be	fulfilled.	This	determined	faith	is	called	
dṛḍha-vrata,	
and	it
is	the	beginning	of	
bhakti-yoga	
or	transcendental	loving	service.	That	is	the
verdict	of	all	scriptures.	This	Seventh	Chapter	of	the	
Gītā
	is	the	substance	of
that	conviction.
Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	Seventh	Chapter	of	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhagavad-gītā
	in	the	matter	of	Knowledge	of	the	Absolute.Chapter-8
CHAPTER	EIGHT
Attaining	the	Supreme
TEXT	1
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
ि क ं
	
त द ्
	
ब ् र ቊ
	
ि क म ᇲ य ा ᇰ म ं
	
ि क ं
	
क म ᆼ
	
प ु ኄ ष ो ሧ म
	
।
अ ि ध भ ू त ं
	
च
	
ि क ं
	
प ् र ो ᇧ त म ि ध द ै व ं
	
ि क म ु ᇫ य त े
	
॥
१
॥
arjuna	uvāca
kiṁ	tad-brahma	kim	adhyātmaṁ
kiṁ	karma	puruṣottama
adhibhūtaṁ	ca	kiṁ	proktamadhidaivaṁ	kim	ucyate
arjunaḥ	uvāca—
Arjuna	said;	
kim—
what;	
tat—
that;	
brahma—
Brahman;	
kim
—
what;	
adhyātmam—
the	self;	
kim—
what;	
karma—
fruitive	activities;
puruṣottama
—O	Supreme	Person;	
adhibhūtam—
the	material	manifestation;
ca—
and;	
kim—
what;	
proktam—
is	called;	
adhidaivam—
the	demigods;	
kim—
what;	
ucyate—
is	called.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	inquired:	O	my	Lord,	O	Supreme	Person,	what	is	Brahman?
What	is	the	self?	What	are	fruitive	activities?	What	is	this	material
manifestation?	And	what	are	the	demigods?	Please	explain	this	to	me.
PURPORT
In	this	chapter	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	answers	these	different	questions	of	Arjuna
beginning	with,	"What	is	Brahman?"	The	Lord	also	explains	
karma,	
fruitive
activities,	devotional	service	and	
yoga	
principles,	and	devotional	service	in	its
pure	form.	The	
Śrīmad-	Bhāgavatam	
explains	that	the	Supreme	Absolute
Truth	is	known	as	Brahman,	Paramātmā,	and	Bhagavān.	In	addition,	the	living
entity,	individual	soul,	is	also	called	Brahman.	Arjuna	also	inquires	about
ātmā,	
which	refers	to	body,	soul	and	mind.	According	to	the	Vedic	dictionary,
ātmā	
refers	to	the	mind,	soul,	body	and	senses	also.
Arjuna	has	addressed	the	Supreme	Lord	as	
Puruṣottama,	
Supreme	Person,
which	means	that	he	was	putting	these	questions	not	simply	to	a	friend	but	to
the	Supreme	Person,	knowing	Him	to	be	the	supreme	authority	able	to	give
definitive	answers.
TEXT	2
अ ि ध य ᇥ ः
	
क थ ं
	
क ो ऽ त ् र
	
द े ह े ऽ ि ᇿ म ᇳ म ध ु स ू द न
	
।
प ् र य ा ण क ा ल े
	
च
	
क थ ं
	
ᇥ े य ो ऽ ि स
	
ि न य त ा ᇰ म ि भ ः
	
॥
२
॥
adhiyajñaḥ	kathaṁ	ko	'tra
dehe	'smin	madhusūdanaprayāṇa-kāle	ca	kathaṁ
jñeyo	'si	niyatātmabhiḥ
adhiyajñaḥ—
the	Lord	of	sacrifice;	
katham—
how;	
kaḥ—
who;	
atra—
here;
dehe—
in	the	body;	
asmin—
in	this;	
madhusūdana
—O	Madhusūdana;	
prayāṇa-
kāle—
at	the	time	of	death;	
ca—
and;	
katham—
how;	
jñeyaḥ—
be	known;	
asi
—
You	can;	
niyata-ātmabhiḥ—
by	the	self-controlled.
TRANSLATION
How	does	this	Lord	of	sacrifice	live	in	the	body,	and	in	which	part	does
He	live,	O	Madhusūdana?	And	how	can	those	engaged	in	devotional
service	know	You	at	the	time	of	death?
PURPORT
The	Lord	of	sacrifice	accepts	Indra	and	Viṣṇu.	Viṣṇu	is	the	chief	of	the
primal	demigods,	including	Brahmā	and	Śiva,	and	Indra	is	the	chief	of	the
administrative	demigods.	Both	Indra	and	Viṣṇu	are	worshiped	by	
yajña
performances.	But	here	Arjuna	asks	who	is	actually	the	Lord	of	
yajña
(sacrifice),	and	how	is	the	Lord	residing	within	the	body	of	the	living	entity.
Arjuna	addresses	the	Lord	as	Madhusūdana	because	Kṛṣṇa	once	killed	a
demon	named	Madhu.	Actually	these	questions,	which	are	of	the	nature	of
doubts,	should	not	have	arisen	in	the	mind	of	Arjuna	because	Arjuna	is	a
Kṛṣṇa	conscious	devotee.	Therefore	these	doubts	are	like	demons.	Since
Kṛṣṇa	is	so	expert	in	killing	demons,	Arjuna	here	addresses	Him	as
Madhusūdana	so	that	Kṛṣṇa	might	kill	the	demonic	doubts	that	arise	in
Arjuna's	mind.
Now	the	word	
prayāṇa-kāle	
in	this	verse	is	very	significant	because
whatever	we	do	in	life	will	be	tested	at	the	time	of	death.	Arjuna	fears	that	at
the	time	of	death,	those	who	are	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	will	forget	the
Supreme	Lord	because	at	such	a	time	body	functions	are	disrupted	and	the
mind	may	be	in	a	panic-stricken	state.	Therefore	Mahārāja	Kulaśekhara,	a
great	devotee,	prays,	"My	dear	Lord,	may	I	die	immediately	now	that	I'm
healthy	so	that	the	swan	of	my	mind	may	enter	into	the	stem	of	Thy	lotus
feet."	This	metaphor	is	used	because	the	swan	often	takes	pleasure	in	entering
the	stem	of	the	lotus	flower-similarly,	the	mind	of	the	pure	devotee	is	drawn	tothe	lotus	feet	of	the	Lord.	Mahārāja	Kulaśekhara	fears	that	at	the	moment	of
death	his	throat	will	be	so	choked	up	that	he	will	not	be	able	to	chant	the	holy
names,	so	it	is	better	to	"die	immediately."	Arjuna	questions	how	one's	mind
can	remain	fixed	on	Kṛṣṇa's	lotus	feet	at	such	times.
TEXT	3
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
अ ᇤ र ं
	
ब ् र ቊ
	
प र म ं
	
ᇿ व भ ा व ो ऽ ᇲ य ा ᇰ म म ु ᇫ य त े
	
।
भ ू त भ ा व ो द ् भ व क र ो
	
ि व स ग ᆼ ः
	
क म ᆼ स ं ि ᇥ त ः
	
॥
३
॥
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
akṣaraṁ	brahma	paramaṁ
svabhāvo	'dhyātmam	ucyate
bhūta-bhāvodbhava-karo
visargaḥ	karma-saṁjñitaḥ
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
akṣaram—
indestructible;	
brahma—
Brahman;	
paramam—
transcendental;	
svabhāvaḥ—
eternal	nature;	
adhyātmam—
the	self;	
ucyate—
is	called;	
bhūta-bhāva-
udbhava-karaḥ—
action	producing	the	material	bodies	of	the	living	entities;
visargaḥ—
creation;	
karma—
fruitive	activities;	
saṁjñitaḥ—
is	called.
TRANSLATION
The	Supreme	Lord	said,	The	indestructible,	transcendental	living
entity	is	called	Brahman,	and	his	eternal	nature	is	called	the	self.	Action
pertaining	to	the	development	of	these	material	bodies	is	called	karma,	or
fruitive	activities.
PURPORT
Brahman	is	indestructible	and	eternally	existing,	and	its	constitution	is	not
changed	at	any	time.	But	beyond	Brahman	there	is	Parabrahman.	Brahman
refers	to	the	living	entity,	and	Parabrahman	refers	to	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead.	The	constitutional	position	of	the	living	entity	is	different	fromthe	position	he	takes	in	the	material	world.	In	material	consciousness,	his
nature	is	to	try	to	be	the	lord	of	matter,	but	in	spiritual	(Kṛṣṇa)	consciousness,
his	position	is	to	serve	the	Supreme.	When	the	living	entity	is	in	material
consciousness,	he	has	to	take	on	various	bodies	in	the	material	world.	That	is
called	
karma,	
or	varied	creation	by	the	force	of	material	consciousness.
In	Vedic	literature	the	living	entity	is	called	
jīvātmā	
and	Brahman,	but	he	is
never	called	Parabrahman.	The	living	entity	
(jīvātmā)	
takes	different	positions
—
sometimes	he	merges	into	the	dark	material	nature	and	identifies	himself
with	matter,	and	sometimes	he	identifies	himself	with	the	superior	spiritual
nature.	Therefore	he	is	called	the	Supreme	Lord's	marginal	energy.	According
to	his	identification	with	material	or	spiritual	nature,	he	receives	a	material	or
spiritual	body.	In	material	nature	he	may	take	a	body	from	any	of	the
8,400,000	species	of	life,	but	in	spiritual	nature	he	has	only	one	body.	In
material	nature	he	is	sometimes	manifested	as	a	man,	demigod,	an	animal,	a
beast,	bird,	etc.,	according	to	his	
karma.	
To	attain	material	heavenly	planets
and	enjoy	their	facilities,	he	sometimes	performs	sacrifices	
(yajña),	
but	when
his	merit	is	exhausted,	he	returns	to	earth	again	in	the	form	of	a	man.
In	the	process	of	sacrifice,	the	living	entity	makes	specific	sacrifices	to
attain	specific	heavenly	planets	and	consequently	reaches	them.	When	the
merit	of	sacrifice	is	exhausted,	then	the	living	entity	descends	to	earth	in	the
form	of	rain,	then	takes	on	the	form	of	grains,	and	the	grains	are	eaten	by	man
and	transformed	into	semen,	which	impregnates	a	woman,	and	thus	the	living
entity	once	again	attains	the	human	form	to	perform	sacrifice	and	so	repeat	the
same	cycle.	In	this	way,	the	living	entity	perpetually	comes	and	goes	on	the
material	path.	The	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person,	however,	avoids	such	sacrifices.
He	takes	directly	to	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	thereby	prepares	himself	to
return	to	Godhead.
Impersonalist	commentators	on	the	
Gītā	
unreasonably	assume	that
Brahman	takes	the	form	of	
jīva	
in	the	material	world,	and	to	substantiate	this
they	refer	to	Chapter	Fifteen,	verse	7,	of	the	
Gītā.	
But	this	verse	also	speaks	of
the	living	entity	as	"an	eternal	fragment	of	Myself."	The	fragment	of	God,	the
living	entity,	may	fall	down	into	the	material	world,	but	the	Supreme	Lord
(Acyuta)	
never	falls	down.	Therefore	this	assumption	that	the	Supreme
Brahman	assumes	the	form	of	
jīva
	is	not	acceptable.	It	is	important	to
remember	that	in	Vedic	literature	Brahman	(the	living	entity)	is	distinguished
from	Parabrahman	(the	Supreme	Lord).
TEXT	4अ ि ध भ ू त ं
	
ᇤ र ो
	
भ ा व ः
	
प ु ኄ ष ᇽ च ा ि ध द ै व त म ्
	
।
अ ि ध य ᇥ ो ऽ ह म े व ा त ् र
	
द े ह े
	
द े ह भ ृ त ा ं
	
व र
	
॥
४
॥
adhibhūtaṁ	kṣaro	bhāvaḥ
puruṣaś	cādhidaivatam
adhiyajño	'ham	evātra
dehe	deha-bhṛtāṁ	vara
adhibhūtam—
the	physical	manifestation;	
kṣaraḥ—
constantly	changing;
bhāvaḥ—
nature;	
puruṣaḥ—
the	universal	form;	
ca—
and;	
adhidaivatam—
including	all	demigods	like	the	sun	and	moon;	
adhiyajñaḥ—
the	Supersoul;
aham—
I	(Kṛṣṇa);	
eva—
certainly;	
atra—
in	this;	
dehe—
body;	
deha-bhṛtām—
of	the	embodied;	
vara—
the	Supreme.
TRANSLATION
Physical	nature	is	known	to	be	endlessly	mutable.	The	universe	is	the
cosmic	form	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	and	I	am	that	Lord	represented	as	the
Supersoul,	dwelling	in	the	heart	of	every	embodied	being.
PURPORT
The	physical	nature	is	constantly	changing.	Material	bodies	generally	pass
through	six	stages:	they	are	born,	they	grow,	they	remain	for	some	duration,
they	produce	some	by-products,	they	dwindle,	and	then	they	vanish.	This
physical	nature	is	called	
adhibhūtam.	
Because	it	is	created	at	a	certain	point
and	will	be	annihilated	at	a	certain	point,	the	conception	of	the	universal	form
of	the	Supreme	Lord	that	includes	all	the	demigods	and	their	different	planets
is	called	
adhidaivatam.	
The	individual	soul	
(jīva)	
accompanies	the	body.	The
Supersoul,	a	plenary	representation	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	is	called	the	Paramātmā	or
adhiyajña	
and	is	situated	in	the	heart.	The	word	
eva
	is	particularly	important
in	the	context	of	this	verse	because	by	this	word	the	Lord	stresses	that	the
Paramātmā	is	not	different	from	Him.	The	Supersoul,	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead,	seated	beside	the	individual	soul,	is	the	witness	of	the	individual
soul's	activities	and	is	the	source	of	consciousness.	The	Supersoul	gives	the
jīva	
an	opportunity	to	act	freely,	and	He	witnesses	his	activities.	The	functions
of	all	these	different	manifestations	of	the	Supreme	Lord	automaticallybecome	clarified	for	the	pure	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	devotee	engaged	in
transcendental	service	of	the	Lord.	The	gigantic	universal	form	of	the	Lord
called	
adhidaivatam
	is	contemplated	by	the	neophyte	who	cannot	approach
the	Supreme	Lord	in	His	manifestation	as	Supersoul.	The	neophyte	is	advised
to	contemplate	the	universal	form	whose	legs	are	considered	the	lower	planets
and	whose	eyes	are	considered	the	sun	and	moon,	and	whose	head	is
considered	the	upper	planetary	system.
TEXT	5
अ ᇳ त क ा ल े
	
च
	
म ा म े व
	
ᇿ म र ᇳ म ु ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
क ल े व र म ्
	
।
य ः
	
प ् र य ा ि त
	
स
	
म द ् भ ा व ं
	
य ा ि त
	
न ा ᇿ ᇰ य त ् र
	
स ं श य ः
	
॥
५
॥
anta-kāle	ca	mām	eva
smaran	muktvā	kalevaram
yaḥ	prayāti	sa	mad-bhāvaṁ
yāti	nāsty	atra	saṁśayaḥ
anta-kāle—
at	the	end	of	life;	
ca—
also;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
eva—
certainly;
smaran—
remembering;	
muktvā—
quitting;	
kalevaram—
the	body;	
yaḥ—
he
who;	
prayāti—
goes;	
saḥ—
he;	
mad-bhāvam—
My	nature;	
yati—
achieves;	
na—
not;	
asti—
there	is;	
atra—
here;	
saṁśayaḥ—
doubt.
TRANSLATION
And	whoever,	at	the	time	of	death,	quits	his	body,	remembering	Me
alone,	at	once	attains	My	nature.	Of	this	there	is	no	doubt.
PURPORT
In	this	verse	the	importance	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	stressed.	Anyone
who	quits	his	body	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	at	once	transferred	to	the
transcendental	abode	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	The	word	
smaran	
(remembering)
is	important.	Remembrance	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	not	possible	for	the	impure	soul	who
has	not	practiced	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	in	devotional	service.	To	remember
Kṛṣṇa	one	should	chant	the	
mahāmantra,	
Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	KṛṣṇaKṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/	Hare	Rāma,	Hare	Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,	Hare	Hare,
incessantly,	following	in	the	footsteps	of	Lord	Caitanya,	being	more	tolerant
than	the	tree,	humbler	than	the	grass	and	offering	all	respect	to	others	without
requiring	respect	in	return.	In	such	a	way	one	will	be	able	to	depart	from	the
body	successfully	remembering	Kṛṣṇa	and	so	attain	the	supreme	goal.
TEXT	6
य ं
	
य ं
	
व ा ि प
	
ᇿ म र ᇳ भ ा व ं
	
ᇰ य ज ᇰ य ᇳ त े
	
क ल े व र म ्
	
।
त ं
	
त म े व ै ि त
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
स द ा
	
त द ् भ ा व भ ा ि व त ः
	
॥
६
॥
yaṁ	yaṁ	vāpi	smaran	bhāvaṁ
tyajaty	ante	kalevaram
taṁ	tam	evaiti	kaunteya
sadā	tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ
yam	yam—
whatever;	
vā
—either;	
api—
also;	
smaran—
remembering;
bhāvam	—
nature;	
tyajati—
give	up;	
ante—
at	the	end;	
kalevaram—
this	body;
tam	tam	—
similar;	
eva—
certainly;	
eti—
gets;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of	Kuntī;	
sadā
—always;	
tat
—that;	
bhāva—
state	of	being;	
bhāvitaḥ—
remembering.
TRANSLATION
Whatever	state	of	being	one	remembers	when	he	quits	his	body,	that
state	he	will	attain	without	fail.
PURPORT
The	process	of	changing	one's	nature	at	the	critical	moment	of	death	is	here
explained.	How	can	one	die	in	the	proper	state	of	mind?	Mahārāja	Bharata
thought	of	a	deer	at	the	time	of	death	and	so	was	transferred	to	that	form	of
life.	However,	as	a	deer,	Mahārāja	Bharata	could	remember	his	past	activities.
Of	course	the	cumulative	effect	of	the	thoughts	and	actions	of	one's	life
influences	one's	thoughts	at	the	moment	of	death;	therefore	the	actions	of	this
life	determine	one's	future	state	of	being.	If	one	is	transcendentally	absorbed
in	Kṛṣṇa's	service,then	his	next	body	will	be	transcendental	(spiritual),	notphysical.	Therefore	the	chanting	of	Hare	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	best	process	for
successfully	changing	one's	state	of	being	to	transcendental	life.
TEXT	7
त ᇿ म ा ᇰ स व ᆹ ष ु
	
क ा ल े ष ु
	
म ा म न ु ᇿ म र
	
य ु ᇲ य
	
च
	
।
म ᇹ य ि प ᆼ त म न ो ब ु द ् ि ध म ा ᆼ म े व ै ᇾ य ᇿ य स ं श य ः
	
॥
७
॥
tasmāt	sarveṣu	kāleṣu
mām	anusmara	yudhya	ca
mayy	arpita-mano	buddhir
mām	evaiṣyasy	asaṁśayaḥ
tasmāt—
therefore;	
sarveṣu—
always;	
kāleṣu—
time;	
mām—
unto	Me;
anusmara—
go	on	remembering;	
yudhya—
fight;	
ca—
also;	
mayi—
unto	Me;
arpita—
surrender;	
manaḥ—
mind;	
buddhiḥ—
intellect;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
eva—
surely;	
eṣyasi—
will	attain;	
asaṁśayaḥ—
beyond	a	doubt.
TRANSLATION
Therefore,	Arjuna,	you	should	always	think	of	Me	in	the	form	of	Kṛṣṇa
and	at	the	same	time	carry	out	your	prescribed	duty	of	fighting.	With
your	activities	dedicated	to	Me	and	your	mind	and	intelligence	fixed	on
Me,	you	will	attain	Me	without	doubt.
PURPORT
This	instruction	to	Arjuna	is	very	important	for	all	men	engaged	in	material
activities.	The	Lord	does	not	say	that	one	should	give	up	his	prescribed	duties
or	engagements.	One	can	continue	them	and	at	the	same	time	think	of	Kṛṣṇa
by	chanting	Hare	Kṛṣṇa.	This	will	free	one	from	material	contamination	and
engage	the	mind	and	intelligence	in	Kṛṣṇa.	By	chanting	Kṛṣṇa's	names,	one
will	be	transferred	to	the	supreme	planet,	Kṛṣṇaloka,	without	a	doubt.
TEXT	8अ ᇷ य ा स य ो ग य ु ᇧ त े न
	
च े त स ा
	
न ा ᇳ य ग ा ि म न ा
	
।
प र म ं
	
प ु ኄ ष ं
	
ि द ᇼ य ं
	
य ा ि त
	
प ा थ ा ᆼ न ु ि च ᇳ त य न ्
	
॥
८
॥
abhyāsa-yoga-yuktena
cetasā	nānya-gāminā
paramaṁ	puruṣaṁ	divyaṁ
yāti	pārthānucintayan
abhyāsa—
practice;	
yoga-yuktena—
being	engaged	in	meditation;	
cetasā—
by	the	mind	and	intelligence;	
na	anya-gāminā—
without	being	deviated;
paramam—
the	Supreme;	
puruṣam—
Personality	of	Godhead;	
divyam—
transcendental;	
yāti—
achieves;	
pārtha
—O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
anucintayan
—
constantly	thinking	of.
TRANSLATION
He	who	meditates	on	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	his	mind
constantly	engaged	in	remembering	Me,	undeviated	from	the	path,	he,	O
Pārtha	[Arjuna],	is	sure	to	reach	Me.
PURPORT
In	this	verse	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	stresses	the	importance	of	remembering	Him.
One's	memory	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	revived	by	chanting	the	
mahāmantra,	
Hare	Kṛṣṇa.
By	this	practice	of	chanting	and	hearing	the	sound	vibration	of	the	Supreme
Lord,	one's	ear,	tongue	and	mind	are	engaged.	This	mystic	meditation	is	very
easy	to	practice,	and	it	helps	one	attain	the	Supreme	Lord.	
Puruṣam	
means
enjoyer.	Although	living	entities	belong	to	the	marginal	energy	of	the	Supreme
Lord,	they	are	in	material	contamination.	They	think	themselves	enjoyers,	but
they	are	not	the	supreme	enjoyer.	Here	it	is	clearly	stated	that	the	supreme
enjoyer	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	in	His	different	manifestations
and	plenary	expansions	as	Nārāyaṇa,	Vāsudeva,	etc.
The	devotees	can	constantly	think	of	the	object	of	worship,	the	Supreme
Lord,	in	any	of	His	features,	Nārāyaṇa,	Kṛṣṇa,	Rāma,	etc.,	by	chanting	Hare
Kṛṣṇa.	This	practice	will	purify	him,	and	at	the	end	of	his	life,	due	to	his
constant	chanting,	he	will	be	transferred	to	the	kingdom	of	God.	
Yoga	
practice
is	meditation	on	the	Supersoul	within;	similarly,	by	chanting	Hare	Kṛṣṇa	onefixes	his	mind	always	on	the	Supreme	Lord.	The	mind	is	fickle,	and	therefore
it	is	necessary	to	engage	the	mind	by	force	to	think	of	Kṛṣṇa.	One	example
often	given	is	that	of	the	caterpillar	that	thinks	of	becoming	a	butterfly	and	so
is	transformed	into	a	butterfly	in	the	same	life.	Similarly,	if	we	constantly
think	of	Kṛṣṇa,	it	is	certain	that	at	the	end	of	our	lives	we	shall	have	the	same
bodily	constitution	as	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	9
क ि व ं
	
प ु र ा ण म न ु श ा ि स त ा र
-
म ण ो र ण ी य ं स म न ु ᇿ म र े ሱ ः
	
।
स व ᆼ ᇿ य
	
ध ा त ा र म ि च ᇳ ᇰ य ኅ प
-
म ा ि द ᇰ य व ण ᆾ
	
त म स ः
	
प र ᇿ त ा त ्
	
॥
९
॥
kaviṁ	purāṇam	anuśāsitāram
aṇor	aṇīyāṁsam	anusmared	yaḥ
sarvasya	dhātāram	acintya-rūpam
āditya-varṇaṁ	tamasaḥ	parastāt
kavim—
one	who	knows	everything;	
purāṇam
—the	oldest;	
anuśāsitāram—
the	controller;	
aṇoḥ—
of	the	atom;	
aṇīyāṁsam
—smaller	than;	
anusmaret
—
always	thinking;	
yaḥ
—one	who;	
sarvasya
—of	everything;	
dhātāram
—
maintainer;	
acintya
—inconceivable;	
rūpam
—form;	
āditya-varṇam
—
illuminated	like	the	sun;	
tamasaḥ
—of	the	darkness;	
parastāt
—
transcendental.
TRANSLATION
One	should	meditate	upon	the	Supreme	Person	as	the	one	who	knows
everything,	as	He	who	is	the	oldest,	who	is	the	controller,	who	is	smaller
than	the	smallest,	who	is	the	maintainer	of	everything,	who	is	beyond	all
material	conception,	who	is	inconceivable,	and	who	is	always	a	person.	He
is	luminous	like	the	sun	and,	being	transcendental,	is	beyond	this	material
nature.
PURPORTThe	process	of	thinking	of	the	Supreme	is	mentioned	in	this	verse.	The
foremost	point	is	that	He	is	not	impersonal	or	void.	One	cannot	meditate	on
something	impersonal	or	void.	That	is	very	difficult.	The	process	of	thinking
of	Kṛṣṇa,	however,	is	very	easy	and	is	factually	stated	herein.	First	of	all,	He	is
puruṣa,	
spiritual,	Rāma	and	Kṛṣṇa,	and	is	described	herein	as	
kavim;	
that	is,
He	knows	past,	present	and	future	and	therefore	knows	everything.	He	is	the
oldest	personality	because	He	is	the	origin	of	everything;	everything	is	born
out	of	Him.	He	is	also	the	supreme	controller	of	the	universe,	maintainer	and
instructor	of	humanity.	He	is	smaller	than	the	smallest.	The	living	entity	is	one
10,000th	part	of	the	tip	of	a	hair,	but	the	Lord	is	so	inconceivably	small	that
He	enters	into	the	heart	of	this	particle.	Therefore	He	is	called	smaller	than	the
smallest.	As	the	Supreme,	He	can	enter	into	the	atom	and	into	the	heart	of	the
smallest	and	control	him	as	the	Supersoul.	Although	so	small,	He	is	still	all-
pervading	and	is	maintaining	everything.	By	Him	all	these	planetary	systems
are	sustained.	We	often	wonder	how	these	big	planets	are	floating	in	the	air.	It
is	stated	here	that	the	Supreme	Lord,	by	His	inconceivable	energy,	is
sustaining	all	these	big	planets	and	systems	of	galaxies.	The	word	
acintya
(inconceivable)	is	very	significant	in	this	connection.	God's	energy	is	beyond
our	conception,	beyond	our	thinking	jurisdiction,	and	is	therefore	called
inconceivable	
(acintya).	
Who	can	argue	this	point?	He	pervades	this	material
world	and	yet	is	beyond	it.	We	cannot	even	comprehend	this	material	world,
which	is	insignificant	compared	to	the	spiritual	world–so	how	can	we
comprehend	what	is	beyond?	
Acintya	
means	that	which	is	beyond	this
material	world,	that	which	our	argument,	logic	and	philosophical	speculation
cannot	touch,	that	which	is	inconceivable.	Therefore	intelligent	persons,
avoiding	useless	argument	and	speculation,	should	accept	what	is	stated	in
scriptures	like	the	
Vedas,	Gītā,	
and	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
and	follow	the
principles	they	set	down.	This	will	lead	one	to	understanding.
TEXT	10
प ् र य ा ण क ा ल े
	
म न स ा ऽ च ल े न
	
भ ᇧ ᇰ य ा
	
य ु ᇧ त ो
	
य ो ग ब ल े न
	
च ै व
	
।
भ ् ኄ व ो म ᆼ ᇲ य े
	
प ् र ा ण म ा व े ᇽ य
	
स ᇸ य
-	
ᇧ स
	
त ं
	
प र ं
	
प ु ኄ ष म ु प ै ि त
	
ि द ᇼ य म ्
	
॥
१ ०
॥
prayāṇa-kāle	manasā'calenabhaktyā	yukto	yoga-balena	caiva
bhruvor	madhye	prāṇam	āveśya	samyak
sa	taṁ	paraṁ	puruṣam	upaiti	divyam
prayāṇa-kāle—
at	the	time	of	death;	
manasā—
by	the	mind;	
acalena—
without	being	deviated;	
bhaktyā—
in	full	devotion;	
yuktaḥ—
engaged;	
yoga-
balena—
by	the	power	of	mystic	
yoga;	ca—
also;	
eva—
certainly;	
bhruvoḥ—
between	the	two	eyebrows;	
madhye—
in;	
prāṇam—
the	life	air;	
āveśya—
establishing;	
samyak—
completely;	
saḥ—
he;	
tam
—that;	
param
—
transcendental;	
puruṣam
—Personality	of	Godhead;	
upaiti—
achieves;	
divyam
—
in	the	spiritual	kingdom.
TRANSLATION
One	who,	at	the	time	of	death,	fixes	his	life	air	between	the	eyebrows
and	in	full	devotion	engages	himself	in	remembering	the	Supreme	Lord,
will	certainly	attain	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.
PURPORT
In	this	verse	it	is	clearly	stated	that	at	the	time	of	death	the	mind	must	be
fixed	in	devotion	on	the	Supreme	Godhead.	For	those	practiced	in	
yoga
,	it	is
recommended	that	they	raise	the	life	force	between	the	eyebrows,	but	for	a
pure	devotee	who	does	not	practice	such	
yoga
,	the	mind	should	always	be
engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	so	that	at	death	he	can	remember	the
Supreme	by	His	grace.	This	is	explained	in	verse	fourteen.
The	particular	use	of	the	word	
yoga-balena	
is	significant	in	this	verse
because	without	practice	of	
yoga
	one	cannot	come	to	this	transcendental	state
of	being	at	the	time	of	death.	One	cannot	suddenly	remember	the	Supreme
Lord	at	death	unless	he	is	practiced	in	some	
yoga
	system,	especially	the
system	of	
bhakti-yoga.	
Since	one's	mind	at	death	is	very	disturbed,	one	should
practice	transcendence	through	
yoga	
during	one's	life.
TEXT	11
य द ᇤ र ं
	
व े द ि व द ो
	
व द ि ᇳ त
	ि व श ि ᇳ त
	
य ሱ त य ो
	
व ी त र ा ग ा ः
	
।
य ि द ᇫ छ ᇳ त ो
	
ब ् र ቊ च य ᆾ
	
च र ि ᇳ त
	
त ሧ े
	
प द ं
	
स ं ग ् र ह े ण
	
प ् र व ቎ य े
	
॥
१ १
॥
yad	akṣaraṁ	veda-vido	vadanti
viśanti	yad	yatayo	vīta-rāgāḥ
yad	icchanto	brahmacaryaṁ	caranti
tat	te	padaṁ	saṅgraheṇa	pravakṣye
yat—
that	which;	
akṣaram—
inexhaustible;	
veda-vidaḥ—
a	person	conversant
with	the	
Vedas;	vadanti—
say;	
viśanti—
enters;	
yat—
in	which;	
yatayaḥ—
great
sages;	
vīta-rāgāh—
in	the	renounced	order	of	life;	
yat—
that	which;	
icchantaḥ
—
desiring;	
brahmacaryam—
celibacy;	
caranti—
practices;	
tat—
that;	
te—
unto
you;	
padam—
situation;	
saṅgraheṇa—
in	summary;	
pravakṣye—
I	shall	explain.
TRANSLATION
Persons	learned	in	the	Vedas,	who	utter	omkāra	and	who	are	great
sages	in	the	renounced	order,	enter	into	Brahman.	Desiring	such
perfection,	one	practices	celibacy.	I	shall	now	explain	to	you	this	process
by	which	one	may	attain	salvation.
PURPORT
Lord	Kṛṣṇa	explains	that	Brahman,	although	one	without	a	second,	has
different	manifestations	and	features.	For	the	impersonalists,	the	syllable	
om	
is
identical	with	Brahman.	Kṛṣṇa	here	explains	the	impersonal	Brahman	in
which	the	renounced	order	of	sages	enter.
In	the	Vedic	system	of	knowledge,	students,	from	the	very	beginning,	are
taught	to	vibrate	
om	
and	learn	of	the	ultimate	impersonal	Brahman	by	living
with	the	spiritual	master	in	complete	celibacy.	In	this	way	they	realize	two	of
Brahman's	features.	This	practice	is	very	essential	for	the	student's
advancement	in	spiritual	life,	but	at	the	moment	such	
brahmacārī	
(unmarried
celibate)	life	is	not	at	all	possible.	The	social	construction	of	the	world	has
changed	so	much	that	there	is	no	possibility	of	one's	practicing	celibacy	from
the	beginning	of	student	life.	Throughout	the	world	there	are	many	institutions
for	different	departments	of	knowledge,	but	there	is	no	recognized	institutionwhere	students	can	be	educated	in	the	
brahmacārī	
principles.	Unless	one
practices	celibacy,	advancement	in	spiritual	life	is	very	difficult.	Therefore
Lord	Caitanya	has	announced,	according	to	the	scriptural	injunctions	for	this
age	of	Kali,	that	no	process	of	realizing	the	Supreme	is	possible	except	the
chanting	of	the	holy	name	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa:	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa
Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/	Hare	Rāma,	Hare	Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,	Hare	Hare.
TEXT	12
स व ᆼ ሲ ा र ा ि ण
	
स ं य ᇸ य
	
म न ो
	
ᇦ ि द
	
ि न ኄ ᇲ य
	
च
	
।
म ू ᇲ ᇳ य ा ध ा ᆼ य ा ᇰ म न ः
	
प ् र ा ण म ा ि ᇿ थ त ो
	
य ो ग ध ा र ण ा म ्
	
॥
१ २
॥
sarva-dvārāṇi	saṁyamya
mano	hṛdi	nirudhya	ca
mūrdhny	ādhāyātmanaḥ	prāṇam
āsthito	yoga-dhāraṇām
sarva-dvārāṇi—
all	the	doors	of	the	body;	
saṁyamya—
controlling;	
manaḥ
—
mind;	
hṛdi—
in	the	heart;	
nirudhya—
confined;	
ca—
also;	
mūrdhni—
on	the
head;	
ādhāya—
fixed
;	ātmanaḥ—
soul;	
prāṇam—
the	life	air;	
āsthitaḥ
—
situated;	
yoga-dhāraṇām—
the	yogic	situation.
TRANSLATION
The	yogic	situation	is	that	of	detachment	from	all	sensual	engagements.
Closing	all	the	doors	of	the	senses	and	fixing	the	mind	on	the	heart	and
the	life	air	at	the	top	of	the	head,	one	establishes	himself	in	yoga.
PURPORT
To	practice	
yoga,	
as	suggested	here,	one	first	has	to	close	the	door	of	all
sense	enjoyment.	This	practice	is	called	
pratyāhāra,	
or	withdrawing	the
senses	from	the	sense	objects.	Sense	organs	for	acquiring	knowledge,	such	as
the	eyes,	ears,	nose,	tongue	and	touch,	should	be	fully	controlled	and	should
not	be	allowed	to	engage	in	self-gratification.	In	this	way	the	mind	focuses	on
the	Supersoul	in	the	heart	and	the	life	force	is	raised	to	the	top	of	the	head.	Inthe	Sixth	Chapter	this	process	is	described	in	detail.	But	as	mentioned	before,
this	practice	is	not	practical	in	this	age.	The	best	process	is	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	If	one	is	always	able	to	fix	his	mind	on	Kṛṣṇa	in	devotional
service,	it	is	very	easy	for	him	to	remain	in	an	undisturbed	transcendental
trance,	or	in	
samādhi.
TEXT	13
ओ ि म ᇰ य े क ा ᇤ र ं
	
ब ् र ቊ
	
ᇼ य ा ह र ᇳ म ा म न ु ᇿ म र न ्
	
।
य ः
	
प ् र य ा ि त
	
ᇰ य ज ᇳ द े ह ं
	
स
	
य ा ि त
	
प र म ा ं
	
ग ि त म ्
	
॥
१ ३
॥
oṁ	ity	ekākṣaraṁ	brahma-
vyāharan	mām	anusmaran
yaḥ	prayāti	tyajan	dehaṁ
sa	yāti	paramāṁ	gatim
om
—the	combination	of	letters,	
omkāra;	iti
—thus;	
eka-akṣaram—
supreme,	indestructible;	
brahma—
absolute;	
vyāharan—
vibrating;	
mām
—Me
(Kṛṣṇa);	
anusmaran
—remembering;	
yaḥ
—anyone;	
prayāti
—leaves;	
tyajan
—
quitting;	
deham—
this	body;	
saḥ—
he;	
yāti
—achieves;	
paramām
—supreme;
gatim
—	destination.
TRANSLATION
After	being	situated	in	this	yoga	practice	and	vibrating	the	sacred
syllable	om,	the	supreme	combination	of	letters,	if	one	thinks	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	and	quits	his	body,	he	will	certainly
reach	the	spiritual	planets.
PURPORT
It	is	clearly	stated	here	that	
om
,	Brahman,	and	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	are	not	different.
The	impersonal	sound	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	
om,	
but	the	sound	Hare	Kṛṣṇa	contains	
om.
It	is	clearly	recommended	in	this	age	that	if	one	quits	his	body	at	the	end	of
this	life	chanting	the	
mahāmantra
,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	he	will	reach	the	spiritual
planets.	Similarly,	those	who	are	devotees	of	Kṛṣṇa	enter	the	Kṛṣṇa	planet	orGoloka	Vṛndāvana,	whereas	the	impersonalists	remain	in	the	
brahmajyoti.
The	personalists	also	enter	many	innumerable	planets	in	the	spiritual	sky
known	as	Vaikuṇṭhas.
TEXT	14
अ न ᇳ य च े त ा ः
	
स त त ं
	
य ो
	
म ा ं
	
ᇿ म र ि त
	
ि न ᇰ य श ः
	
।
त ᇿ य ा ह ं
	
स ु ल भ ः
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
ि न ᇰ य य ु ᇧ त ᇿ य
	
य ो ि ग न ः
	
॥
१ ४
॥
ananya-cetāḥ	satataṁ
yo	māṁ	smarati	nityaśaḥ
tasyāhaṁ	sulabhaḥ	pārtha
nitya-yuktasya	yoginaḥ
ananya-cetāḥ—
without	deviation;	
satatam
—always;	
yaḥ
—anyone;	
mām
—
Me	(Kṛṣṇa);	
smarati
—remembers;	
nityaśaḥ—
regularly;	
tasya—
to	him;	
aham
—I	am;	
sulabhaḥ—
very	easy	to	achieve;	
pārtha—
O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
nitya—
regularly;	
yuktasya—
engaged;	
yoginaḥ—
of	the	devotee.
TRANSLATION
For	one	who	remembers	Me	without	deviation,	I	am	easy	to	obtain,	O
son	of	Pṛthā,	because	of	his	constant	engagement	in	devotional	service.
PURPORT
In	this	verse	the	
bhakti-yoga	
of	the	unalloyed	devotees	of	the	Supreme
Godhead	is	described.	The	preceeding	verses	mention	four	different	kinds	of
devotees—the	distressed,	the	inquisitive,	those	who	seek	material	gain,	and
the	speculative	philosophers.	Different	processes	of	liberation	from	material
entanglement	have	also	been	described:	
karma-yoga,	jñāna-yoga,	
and	
haṭha-
yoga.	
But	here	
bhakti-yoga,	
without	any	mixture	of	these,	is	mentioned.	In
bhakti-yoga	
the	devotees	desire	nothing	but	Kṛṣṇa.	The	pure	
bhakti	
devotee
does	not	desire	promotion	to	heavenly	planets,	nor	does	he	seek	salvation	or
liberation	from	material	entanglement.	A	pure	devotee	does	not	desire
anything.	In	the	
Caitanya-caritāmṛta	
the	pure	devotee	is	called	
niṣkāma,which	means	he	has	no	desire	for	self-interest.	Perfect	peace	belongs	to	him
alone,	not	to	them	who	strive	for	personal	gain.	The	pure	devotee	only	wants
to	please	the	Supreme	Lord,	and	so	the	Lord	says	that	for	anyone	who	is
unflinchingly	devoted	to	Him,	He	is	easy	to	attain.	The	devotee	can	render
service	to	any	of	the	transcendental	forms	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	and	he	meets
with	none	of	the	problems	that	plague	the	practitioners	of	other	
yogas.	Bhakti-
yoga
	is	very	simple	and	pure	and	easy	to	perform.	One	can	begin	by	simply
chanting	Hare	Kṛṣṇa.	Kṛṣṇa	is	very	merciful	to	those	who	engage	in	His
service,	and	He	helps	in	various	ways	that	devotee	who	is	fully	surrendered	to
Him	so	he	can	understand	Him	as	He	is.	The	Lord	gives	such	a	devotee
sufficient	intelligence	so	that	ultimately	the	devotee	can	attain	Him	in	His
spiritual	kingdom.
The	special	qualification	of	the	pure	devotee	is	that	he	is	always	thinking	of
Kṛṣṇa	without	considering	the	time	or	place.	There	should	be	no	impediments.
He	should	be	able	to	carry	out	his	service	anywhere	and	at	any	time.	Some	say
that	the	devotee	should	remain	in	holy	places	like	Vṛndāvana	or	some	holy
town	where	the	Lord	lived,	but	a	pure	devotee	can	live	anywhere	and	create
the	atmosphere	of	Vṛndāvana	by	his	devotional	service.	It	was	Śrī	Advaita
who	told	Lord	Caitanya,	"Wherever	You	are,	O	Lord—
there
	is	Vṛndāvana."
A	pure	devotee	constantly	remembers	Kṛṣṇa	and	meditates	upon	Him.
These	are	qualifications	of	the	pure	devotee	for	whom	the	Lord	is	most	easily
attainable.	
Bhakti-yoga
	is	the	system	that	the	
Gītā	
recommends	above	all
others.	Generally,	the	
bhakti-yogīs	
are	engaged	in	five	different	ways:	1)
śānta-bhakta,	
engaged	in	devotional	service	in	neutrality;	2)	
dāsya-bhakta,
engaged	in	devotional	service	as	servant;	3)	
sākhya-bhakta,	
engaged	as	friend;
4)	
vātsalya-bhakta,	
engaged	as	parent;	and	5)	
mādhurya-	bhakta,	
engaged	as
conjugal	lover	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	In	any	of	these	ways,	the	pure	devotee	is
always	constantly	engaged	in	the	transcendental	loving	service	of	the	Supreme
Lord	and	cannot	forget	the	Supreme	Lord,	and	so	for	him	the	Lord	is	easily
attained.	A	pure	devotee	cannot	forget	the	Supreme	Lord	for	a	moment,	and
similarly,	the	Supreme	Lord	cannot	forget	His	pure	devotee	for	a	moment.
This	is	the	great	blessing	of	the	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	process	of	chanting	the
mahāmantra,	
Hare	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	15
म ा म ु प े ᇰ य
	
प ु न ज ᆼ ᇳ म
	
द ु ः ख ा ल य म श ा ᇽ व त म ्
	
।
न ा ᇴ न ु व ि ᇳ त
	
म ह ा ᇰ म ा न ः
	
स ं ि स द ् ि ध ं
	
प र म ा ं
	
ग त ा ः
	
॥
१ ५
॥mām	upetya	punar	janma
duḥkhālayam	aśāśvatam—
nāpnuvanti	mahātmānaḥ
saṁsiddhiṁ	paramāṁ	gatāḥ
mām—
unto	Me;	
upetya—
achieving;	
punaḥ—
again;	
janma—
birth;	
duḥkha-
ālayam—
place	of	miseries;	
aśāśvatam—
temporary;	
na—
never;	
āpnuvanti—
attain;	
mahātmānaḥ—
the	great	souls;	
saṁsiddhim—
perfection;	
paramām
—
ultimate;	
gatāḥ—
achieved.
TRANSLATION
After	attaining	Me,	the	great	souls,	who	are	yogīs	in	devotion,	never
return	to	this	temporary	world,	which	is	full	of	miseries,	because	they
have	attained	the	highest	perfection.
PURPORT
Since	this	temporary	material	world	is	full	of	the	miseries	of	birth,	old	age,
disease	and	death,	naturally	he	who	achieves	the	highest	perfection	and	attains
the	supreme	planet,	Kṛṣṇaloka,	Goloka	Vṛndāvana,	does	not	wish	to	return.
The	supreme	planet	is	described	in	Vedic	literature	as	beyond	our	material
vision,	and	it	is	considered	the	highest	goal.	The
	mahātmās
	(great	souls)
receive	transcendental	messages	from	the	realized	devotees	and	thus	gradually
develop	devotional	service	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	become	so	absorbed	in
transcendental	service	that	they	no	longer	desire	elevation	to	any	of	the
material	planets,	nor	do	they	even	want	to	be	transferred	to	any	spiritual
planet.	They	only	want	Kṛṣṇa's	association	and	nothing	else.	Such	great	souls
in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	attain	the	highest	perfection	of	life.	In	other	words,
they	are	the	supreme	souls.
TEXT	16
आ ब ् र ቊ भ ु व न ा ᇺ ल ो क ा ः
	
प ु न र ा व ि त ᆼ न ो ऽ ज ु ᆼ न
	
।
म ा म ु प े ᇰ य
	
त ु
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
प ु न ज ᆼ ᇳ म
	
न
	
ि व ሱ त े
	
॥
१ ६
॥ābrahma-bhuvanāl	lokāḥ
punar	āvartino	'rjuna
mām	upetya	tu	kaunteya
punar	janma	na	vidyate
ābrahma
—up	to	the	Brahmaloka	planet;	
bhuvanāt
—from	the	planetary
systems;	
lokāḥ
—planets;	
punaḥ
—again;	
āvartinaḥ
—returning;	
arjuna
—O
Arjuna;	
mām
—unto	Me;	
upetya
—arriving;	
tu
—but;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of
Kuntī;	
punaḥ	janma
—rebirth;	
na
—never;	
vidyate
—takes	to.
TRANSLATION
From	the	highest	planet	in	the	material	world	down	to	the	lowest,	all
are	places	of	misery	wherein	repeated	birth	and	death	take	place.	But	one
who	attains	to	My	abode,	O	son	of	Kuntī,	never	takes	birth	again.
PURPORT
All	kinds	of	
yogīs
-
karma,	jñāna,	haṭha,	
etc.—eventually	have	to	attain
devotional	perfection	in	
bhakti-yoga,	
or	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	before	they	can
go	to	Kṛṣṇa's	transcendental	abode	and	never	return.	Those	who	attain	the
highest	material	planets	or	the	planets	of	the	demigods	are	again	subjected	to
repeated	birth	and	death.	As	persons	on	earth	are	elevated	to	higher	planets,
people	in	higher	planets	such	as	Brahmaloka,	Candraloka	and	Indraloka	fall
down	to	earth.	The	practice	of	sacrifice	called	
pañcāgni-vidyā,	
recommended
in	the	
Kaṭha	Upaniṣad,	
enables	one	to	achieve	Brahmaloka,	but	if,	in
Brahmaloka,	one	does	not	cultivate	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	then	he	must	return
to	earth.	Those	who	progress	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	in	the	higher	planets	are
gradually	elevated	to	higher	and	higher	planets	and	at	the	time	of	universal
devastation	are	transferred	to	the	eternal	spiritual	kingdom.	When	there	is
devastation	of	this	material	universe,	Brahmā	and	his	devotees,	who	are
constantly	engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	are	all	transferred	to	the	spiritual
universe	and	to	specific	spiritual	planets	according	to	their	desires.
TEXT	17स ह स ् र य ु ग प य ᆼ ᇳ त म ह य ᆼ ሮ ् र ቊ ण ो
	
ि व द ु ः
	
।
र ा ि त ् र ं
	
य ु ग स ह स ् र ा ᇳ त ा ं
	
त े ऽ ह ो र ा त ् र ि व द ो
	
ज न ा ः
	
॥
१ ७
॥
sahasra-yuga-paryantam
ahar	yad	brahmaṇo	viduḥ
rātriṁ	yuga-sahasrāntāṁ
te	'ho-rātra-vido	janāḥ
sahasra—
thousand;	
yuga—
millenniums;	
prayantam—
including;	
ahaḥ—
day;	
yat—
that;	
brahmaṇaḥ—
of	Brahmā;	
viduḥ—
know	it;	
rātrim—
night;	
yuga
—
millenniums;	
sahasra-antām—
similarly,	at	the	end	of	one	thousand;	
te
—
that;	
ahaḥ-rātra—
day	and	night;	
vidaḥ—
understand;	
janāḥ—
people.
TRANSLATION
By	human	calculation,	a	thousand	ages	taken	together	is	the	duration
of	Brahmā's	one	day.	And	such	also	is	the	duration	of	his	night.
PURPORT
The	duration	of	the	material	universe	is	limited.	It	is	manifested	in	cycles	of
kalpas.	
A	
kalpa
	is	a	day	of	Brahmā,	and	one	day	of	Brahmā	consists	of	a
thousand	cycles	of	four	
yugas	
or	ages:	Satya,	Tretā,	Dvāpara,	and	Kali.	The
cycle	of	Satya	is	characterized	by	virtue,	wisdom	and	religion,	there	being
practically	no	ignorance	and	vice,	and	the	
yuga	
lasts	1,728,000	years.	In	the
Tretā-yuga	vice	is	introduced,	and	this	
yuga	
lasts	1,296,000	years.	In	the
Dvāpara-yuga	there	is	an	even	greater	decline	in	virtue	and	religion,	vice
increasing,	and	this	
yuga	
lasts	864,000	years.	And	finally	in	Kali-yuga	(the
yuga	
we	have	now	been	experiencing	over	the	past	5,000	years)	there	is	an
abundance	of	strife,	ignorance,	irreligion	and	vice,	true	virtue	being	practically
nonexistent,	and	this	
yuga	
lasts	432,000	years.	In	Kali-yuga	vice	increases	to
such	a	point	that	at	the	termination	of	the	
yuga	
the	Supreme	Lord	Himself
appears	as	the	Kalki	
avatāra,	
vanquishes	the	demons,	saves	His	devotees,	and
commences	another	Satya-yuga.	Then	the	process	is	set	rolling	again.	These
four	
yugas,	
rotating	a	thousand	times,	comprise	one	day	of	Brahmā,	the
creator	god,	and	the	same	number	comprise	one	night.	Brahmā	lives	onehundred	of	such	"years"	and	then	dies.	These	"hundred	years"	by	earth
calculations	total	to	311	trillion	and	40	million	earth	years.	By	these
calculations	the	life	of	Brahmā	seems	fantastic	and	interminable,	but	from	the
viewpoint	of	eternity	it	is	as	brief	as	a	lightning	flash.	In	the	causal	ocean
there	are	innumerable	Brahmās	rising	and	disappearing	like	bubbles	in	the
Atlantic.	Brahmā	and	his	creation	are	all	part	of	the	material	universe,	and
therefore	they	are	in	constant	flux.
In	the	material	universe	not	even	Brahmā	is	free	from	the	process	of	birth,
old	age,	disease	and	death.	Brahmā,	however,	is	directly	engaged	in	the
service	of	the	Supreme	Lord	in	the	management	of	this	universe
—	
therefore
he	at	once	attains	liberation.	Elevated	
sannyāsīs
	are	promoted	to	Brahmā's
particular	planet,	Brahmaloka,	which	is	the	highest	planet	in	the	material
universe	and	which	survives	all	the	heavenly	planets	in	the	upper	strata	of	the
planetary	system,	but	in	due	course	Brahmā	and	all	inhabitants	of	Brahmaloka
are	subject	to	death,	according	to	the	law	of	material	nature.
TEXT	18
अ ᇼ य ᇧ त ा ሲ ᆸ ᇧ त य ः
	
स व ा ᆼ ः
	
प ् र भ व ᇳ ᇰ य ह र ा ग म े
	
।
र ा ቔ य ा ग म े
	
प ् र ल ी य ᇳ त े
	
त त ् र ै व ा ᇼ य ᇧ त स ं ᇥ क े
	
॥
१ ८
॥
avyaktād	vyaktayaḥ	sarvāḥ
prabhavanty	ahar-āgame
rātry-āgame	pralīyante
tatraivāvyakta-saṁjñake
avyaktāt—
from	the	unmanifest;	
vyaktayaḥ—
living	entities;	
sarvāḥ—
all;
prabhavanti—
come	into	being;	
ahaḥ-āgame—
at	the	beginning	of	the	day;
rātri-āgame—
at	the	fall	of	night;	
pralīyante—
are	annihilated;	
tatra—
there;
eva—
certainly;	
avyakta—
the	unmanifest;	
saṁjñake—
called.
TRANSLATION
When	Brahmā's	day	is	manifest,	this	multitude	of	living	entities	comes
into	being,	and	at	the	arrival	of	Brahmā's	night	they	are	all	annihilated.PURPORT
The	less	intelligent	
jīvas	
try	to	remain	within	this	material	world	and	are
accordingly	elevated	and	degraded	in	the	various	planetary	systems.	During
the	daytime	of	Brahmā	they	exhibit	their	activities,	and	at	the	coming	of
Brahmā's	night	they	are	annihilated.	In	the	day	they	receive	various	bodies	for
material	activities,	and	at	night	these	bodies	perish.	The	
jīvas	
(individual
souls)	remain	compact	in	the	body	of	Viṣṇu	and	again	and	again	are	manifest
at	the	arrival	of	Brahmā's	day.	When	Brahmā's	life	is	finally	finished,	they	are
all	annihilated	and	remain	unmanifest	for	millions	and	millions	of	years.
Finally,	when	Brahmā	is	born	again	in	another	millennium,	they	are	again
manifest.	In	this	way	the	
jīvas	
are	captivated	by	the	material	world.	However,
those	intelligent	beings	who	take	to	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	chant	Hare
Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Rāma	in	devotional	service	transfer	themselves,	even	in	this	life,
to	the	spiritual	planet	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	become	eternally	blissful	there,	not	being
subject	to	such	rebirths.
TEXT	19
भ ू त ग ् र ा म ः
	
स
	
ए व ा य ं
	
भ ू ᇰ व ा
	
भ ू ᇰ व ा
	
प ् र ल ी य त े
	
।
र ा ቔ य ा ग म े ऽ व श ः
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
प ् र भ व ᇰ य ह र ा ग म े
	
॥
१ ९
॥
bhūta-grāmaḥ	sa	evāyaṁ
bhūtvā	bhūtvā	pralīyate
rātry-āgame	'vaśaḥ	pārtha
prabhavaty	ahar-āgame
bhūta-grāmaḥ—
the	aggregate	of	all	living	entities;	
saḥ—
they;	
eva—
certainly;	
ayam—
this;	
bhūtvā	bhūtvā—
taking	birth;	
pralīyate—
annihilate;
rātri—
night;	
āgame—
on	arrival;	
avaśaḥ—
automatically;	
pārtha
—O	son	of
Pṛthā;	
prabhavanti—
manifest;	
ahaḥ—
during	daytime;	
āgame—
on	arrival.
TRANSLATION
Again	and	again	the	day	comes,	and	this	host	of	beings	is	active;	andagain	the	night	falls,	O	Pārtha,	and	they	are	helplessly	dissolved.
TEXT	20
प र ᇿ त ᇿ म ा ሧ ु
	
भ ा व ो ऽ ᇳ य ो ऽ ᇼ य ᇧ त ो ऽ ᇼ य ᇧ त ा ᇰ स न ा त न ः
	
।
य ः
	
स
	
स व ᆹ ष ु
	
भ ू त े ष ु
	
न ᇽ य ᇰ स ु
	
न
	
ि व न ᇽ य ि त
	
॥
२ ०
॥
paras	tasmāt	tu	bhāvo	'nyo
'vyakto	'vyaktāt	sanātanaḥ
yaḥ	sa	sarveṣu	bhūteṣu
naśyatsu	na	vinaśyati
paraḥ—
transcendental;	
tasmāt—
from	that;	
tu—
but;	
bhāvaḥ—
nature;	
anyaḥ
—
another;	
avyaktaḥ—
unmanifest;	
avyaktāt—
from	the	unmanifest;	
sanātanaḥ
—
eternal
;	yaḥ—
that;	
saḥ—
which;	
sarveṣu—
all;	
bhūteṣu—
manifestation;
naśyatsu—
being	annihilated;	
na—
never;	
vinaśyati—
annihilated.
TRANSLATION
Yet	there	is	another	nature,	which	is	eternal	and	is	transcendental	to
this	manifested	and	unmanifested	matter.	It	is	supreme	and	is	never
annihilated.	When	all	in	this	world	is	annihilated,	that	part	remains	as	it
is.
PURPORT
Kṛṣṇa's	superior	spiritual	energy	is	transcendental	and	eternal.	It	is	beyond
all	the	changes	of	material	nature,	which	is	manifest	and	annihilated	during
the	days	and	nights	of	Brahmā.	Kṛṣṇa's	superior	energy	is	completely	opposite
in	quality	to	material	nature.	Superior	and	inferior	nature	are	explained	in	the
Seventh	Chapter.
TEXT	21
अ ᇼ य ᇧ त ो ऽ ᇤ र
	
इ ᇰ य ु ᇧ त ᇿ त म ा ह ु ः
	
प र म ा ं
	
ग ि त म ्
	
।
य ं
	
प ् र ा ᇴ य
	
न
	
ि न व त ᆼ ᇳ त े
	
त ሬ ा म
	
प र म ं
	
म म
	
॥
२ १
॥avyakto	'kṣara	ity	uktas
tam	āhuḥ	paramāṁ	gatim
yaṁ	prāpya	na	nivartante
tad	dhāma	paramaṁ	mama
avyaktaḥ—
unmanifested;	
akṣaraḥ—
infallible;	
iti—
thus;	
uktaḥ—
said;	
tam
—that	which;	
āhuḥ—
is	known;	
paramām—
ultimate;	
gatim—
destination;	
yam
—
that	which;	
prāpya—
gaining;	
na—
never;	
nivartante—
comes	back;	
tat-
dhāma—
that	abode;	
paramam—
supreme;	
mama—
Mine.
TRANSLATION
That	supreme	abode	is	called	unmanifested	and	infallible,	and	it	is	the
supreme	destination.	When	one	goes	there,	he	never	comes	back.	That	is
My	supreme	abode.
PURPORT
The	supreme	abode	of	the	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	is	described	in
the	
Brahma-saṁhitā	
as	
cintāmaṇi-dhāma,	
a	place	where	all	desires	are
fulfilled.	The	supreme	abode	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	known	as	Goloka	Vṛndāvana	is
full	of	palaces	made	of	touchstone.	There	are	also	trees	which	are	called
"desire	trees"	that	supply	any	type	of	eatable	upon	demand,	and	there	are	cows
known	as	
surabhi	
cows	which	supply	a	limitless	supply	of	milk.	In	this	abode,
the	Lord	is	served	by	hundreds	of	thousands	of	goddesses	of	fortune
(Lakṣmīs),	and	He	is	called	Govinda,	the	primal	Lord	and	the	cause	of	all
causes.	The	Lord	is	accustomed	to	blow	His	flute	
(venum	kvanantam).	
His
transcendental	form	is	the	most	attractive	in	all	the	worlds—His	eyes	are	like
the	lotus	petals	and	the	color	of	His	body	like	clouds.	He	is	so	attractive	that
His	beauty	excels	that	of	thousands	of	cupids.	He	wears	saffron	cloth,	a
garland	around	His	neck	and	a	peacock	feather	in	His	hair.	In	the	
Gītā	
Lord
Krṣṇa	gives	only	a	small	hint	of	His	personal	abode	(Goloka	Vṛndāvana)
which	is	the	supermost	planet	in	the	spiritual	kingdom.	A	vivid	description	is
given	in	the	
Brahma-saṁhitā.	
Vedic	literature	states	that	there	is	nothing
superior	to	the	abode	of	the	Supreme	Godhead,	and	that	that	abode	is	the
ultimate	destination.	When	one	attains	to	it,	he	never	returns	to	the	material
world.	Kṛṣṇa's	supreme	abode	and	Kṛṣṇa	Himself	are	nondifferent,	being	ofthe	same	quality.	On	this	earth,	Vṛndāvana,	ninety	miles	southeast	of	Delhi,	is
a	replica	of	that	supreme	Goloka	Vṛndāvana	located	in	the	spiritual	sky.	When
Kṛṣṇa	descended	on	this	earth,	He	sported	on	that	particular	tract	of	land
known	as	Vṛndāvana	in	the	district	of	Mathurā,	India.
TEXT	22
प ु ኄ ष ः
	
स
	
प र ः
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
भ ᇧ ᇰ य ा
	
ल ᇷ य ᇿ ᇰ व न ᇳ य य ा
	
।
य ᇿ य ा ᇳ त ः ᇿ थ ा ि न
	
भ ू त ा ि न
	
य े न
	
स व ᆼ ि म द ं
	
त त म ्
	
॥
२ २
॥
puruṣaḥ	sa	paraḥ	pārtha
bhaktyā	labhyas	tv	ananyayā
yasyāntaḥsthāni	bhūtāni
yena	sarvam	idaṁ	tatam
puruṣaḥ—
the	Supreme	Personality;	
saḥ—
He;	
paraḥ
—the	Supreme,	than
whom	no	one	is	greater;	
pārtha—
O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
bhaktyā—
by	devotional
service;	
labhyaḥ—
can	be	achieved;	
tu—
but;	
ananyayā—
unalloyed,
undeviating	devotion;	
yasya—
His;	
antaḥsthāni—
within;	
bhūtāni—
all	this
material	manifestation;	
yena—
by	whom;	
sarvam—
all;	
idam—
whatever	we	can
see;	
tatam—
distributed.
TRANSLATION
The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	who	is	greater	than	all,	is
attainable	by	unalloyed	devotion.	Although	He	is	present	in	His	abode,	He
is	all-pervading,	and	everything	is	situated	within	Him.
PURPORT
It	is	here	clearly	stated	that	the	supreme	destination	from	which	there	is	no
return	is	the	abode	of	Kṛṣṇa,	the	Supreme	Person.	The	
Brahma-saṁhitā
describes	this	supreme	abode	as	
ānanda-cinmaya-rasa,	
a	place	where
everything	is	full	of	spiritual	bliss.	Whatever	variegatedness	is	manifest	there
is	all	of	the	quality	of	spiritual	bliss—there	is	nothing	material.	All
variegatedness	is	expanded	as	the	spiritual	expansion	of	the	Supreme	GodheadHimself,	for	the	manifestation	there	is	totally	of	the	spiritual	energy,	as
explained	in	Chapter	Seven.	As	far	as	this	material	world	is	concerned,
although	the	Lord	is	always	in	His	supreme	abode,	He	is	nonetheless	all-
pervading	by	His	material	energy.	So	by	His	spiritual	and	material	energies	He
is	present	everywhere
—
both	in	the	material	and	in	the	spiritual	universes.
Yasyāntaḥsthāni	
means	that	everything	is	sustained	by	Him,	whether	it	be
spiritual	or	material	energy.
It	is	clearly	stated	here	that	only	by	
bhakti,	
or	devotional	service,	can	one
enter	into	the	Vaikuṇṭha	(spiritual)	planetary	system.	In	all	the	Vaikuṇṭhas
there	is	only	one	Supreme	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	who	has	expanded	Himself	into
millions	and	millions	of	plenary	expansions.	These	plenary	expansions	are
four-armed,	and	they	preside	over	the	innumerable	spiritual	planets.	They	are
known	by	a	variety	of	names	-Puruṣottama,	Trivikrama,	Keśava,	Mādhava,
Aniruddha,	Hṛṣīkeśa,	Saṅkarṣaṇa,	Pradyumna,	Śrīdhara,	Vāsudeva,
Dāmodara,	Janārdana,	Nārāyaṇa,	Vāmana,	Padmanābha,	etc.	These	plenary
expansions	are	likened	unto	the	leaves	of	a	tree,	and	the	main	tree	is	likened	to
Kṛṣṇa.	Kṛṣṇa,	dwelling	in	Goloka	Vṛndāvana,	His	supreme	abode,
systematically	conducts	all	affairs	of	both	universes	(material	and	spiritual)
without	a	flaw	by	power	of	His	all-pervasiveness.
TEXT	23
य त ् र
	
क ा ल े
	
ᇰ व न ा व ृ ि ሧ म ा व ृ ि ሧ ं
	
च ै व
	
य ो ि ग न ः
	
।
प ् र य ा त ा
	
य ा ि ᇳ त
	
त ं
	
क ा ल ं
	
व ቎ य ा ि म
	
भ र त ष ᆼ भ
	
॥
२ ३
॥
yatra	kāle	tv	anāvṛttim
āvṛttiṁ	caiva	yoginaḥ
prayātā	yānti	taṁ	kālaṁ
vakṣyāmi	bharatarṣabha
yatra—
in	that;	
kāle—
time;	
tu—
but;	
anāvṛttim—
no	return;	
āvṛttim—	
return;
ca—
also;	
eva—
certainly;	
yoginaḥ—
of	different	kinds	of	mystics;	
prayātāḥ
—
one	who	goes;	
yānti—
departs;	
tam—
that;	
kālam—
time;	
vakṣyāmi	
—
describing;	
bharatarṣabha
—O	best	of	the	Bhāratas.
TRANSLATIONO	best	of	the	Bhāratas,	I	shall	now	explain	to	you	the	different	times	at
which,	passing	away	from	this	world,	one	does	or	does	not	come	back.
PURPORT
The	unalloyed	devotees	of	the	Supreme	Lord	who	are	totally	surrendered
souls	do	not	care	when	they	leave	their	bodies	or	by	what	method.	They	leave
everything	in	Kṛṣṇa's	hands	and	so	easily	and	happily	return	to	Godhead.	But
those	who	are	not	unalloyed	devotees	and	who	depend	instead	on	such
methods	of	spiritual	realization	as	
karma-yoga,	jñāna-yoga,	haṭha-yoga,	
etc.,
must	leave	the	body	at	a	suitable	time	and	thereby	be	assured	whether	or	not
they	will	return	to	the	world	of	birth	and	death.
If	the	
yogī
	is	perfect,	he	can	select	the	time	and	place	for	leaving	this
material	world,	but	if	he	is	not	so	perfect,	then	he	has	to	leave	at	nature's	will.
The	most	suitable	time	to	leave	the	body	and	not	return	is	being	explained	by
the	Lord	in	these	verses.	According	to	Ācārya	Baladeva	Vidyābhūṣaṇa,	the
Sanskrit	word	
kāla	
used	herein	refers	to	the	presiding	deity	of	time.
TEXT	24
अ ि ᇩ न ᇬ य ो ᆼ ि त र ह ः
	
श ु ᇧ ल ः
	
ष ᇯ म ा स ा
	
उ ሧ र ा य ण म ्
	
।
त त ् र
	
प ् र य ा त ा
	
ग ᇫ छ ि ᇳ त
	
ब ् र ቊ
	
ब ् र ቊ ि व द ो
	
ज न ा ः
	
॥
२ ४
॥
agnir	jyotir	ahaḥ	śuklaḥ
ṣaṇ-māsā	uttarāyaṇam
tatra	prayātā	gacchanti
brahma	brahma-vido	janāḥ
agniḥ—
fire;	
jyotiḥ—
light;	
ahaḥ—
day;	
śuklaḥ—
white;	
ṣaṭ-māsāḥ—
six
months;	
uttarāyaṇam—
when	the	sun	passes	on	the	northern	side;	
tatra—
there;	
prayātāḥ
—one	who	goes;	
gacchanti—
passes	away;	
brahma—
the
Absolute;	
brahma-vidaḥ—
one	who	knows	the	Absolute;	
janāḥ—
person.
TRANSLATION
Those	who	know	the	Supreme	Brahman	pass	away	from	the	worldduring	the	influence	of	the	fiery	god,	in	the	light,	at	an	auspicious
moment,	during	the	fortnight	of	the	moon	and	the	six	months	when	the
sun	travels	in	the	north.
PURPORT
When	fire,	light,	day	and	moon	are	mentioned,	it	is	to	be	understood	that
over	all	of	them	there	are	various	presiding	deities	who	make	arrangements
for	the	passage	of	the	soul.	At	the	time	of	death,	the	
jīva	
sets	forth	on	the	path
to	a	new	life.	If	one	leaves	the	body	at	the	time	designated	above,	either
accidently	or	by	arrangement,	it	is	possible	for	him	to	attain	the	impersonal
brahmajyoti.	
Mystics	who	are	advanced	in	
yoga	
practice	can	arrange	the	time
and	place	to	leave	the	body.	Others	have	no	control—if	by	accident	they	leave
at	an	auspicious	moment,	then	they	will	not	return	to	the	cycle	of	birth	and
death,	but	if	not,	then	there	is	every	possibility	that	they	will	have	to	return.
However,	for	the	pure	devotee	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	there	is	no	fear	of
returning,	whether	he	leaves	the	body	at	an	auspicious	or	inauspicious
moment,	by	accident	or	arrangement.
TEXT	25
ध ू म ो
	
र ा ि त ् र ᇿ त थ ा
	
क ृ ᇾ ण ः
	
ष ᇯ म ा स ा
	
द ि ᇤ ण ा य न म ्
	
।
त त ् र
	
च ा ᇳ द ् र म स ं
	
ᇬ य ो ि त य ो ᆼ ग ी
	
प ् र ा ᇴ य
	
ि न व त ᆼ त े
	
॥
२ ५
॥
dhūmo	rātris	tathā	kṛṣṇaḥ
ṣaṇ-māsā	dakṣiṇāyanam
tatra	cāndramasaṁ	jyotir
yogī	prāpya	nivartate
dhūmaḥ—
smoke;	
rātriḥ
—night;	
tathā—
also;	
kṛṣṇaḥ
—the	fortnight	of	the
dark	moon;	
ṣaṭ-māsāḥ
—the	six	months;	
dakṣiṇa-ayanam—
when	the	sun
passes	on	the	southern	side;	
tatra
—there;	
cāndramasam—
the	moon	planet;
jyotiḥ—
light,	
yogī
—the	mystic;	
prāpya—
achieves;	
nivartate
—comes	back.
TRANSLATIONThe	mystic	who	passes	away	from	this	world	during	the	smoke,	the
night,	the	moonlight	fortnight,	or	in	the	six	months	when	the	sun	passes	to
the	south,	or	who	reaches	the	moon	planet,	again	comes	back.
PURPORT
In	the	Third	Canto	of	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
we	are	informed	that	those	who
are	expert	in	fruitive	activities	and	sacrificial	methods	on	earth	attain	to	the
moon	at	death.	These	elevated	souls	live	on	the	moon	for	about	10,000	years
(by	demigod	calculations)	and	enjoy	life	by	drinking	soma-rasa.	They
eventually	return	to	earth.	This	means	that	on	the	moon	there	are	higher
classes	of	living	beings,	though	they	may	not	be	perceived	by	the	gross	senses.
TEXT	26
श ु ᇧ ल क ृ ᇾ ण े
	
ग त ी
	
ቋ े त े
	
ज ग त ः
	
श ा ᇽ व त े
	
म त े
	
।
ए क य ा
	
य ा ᇰ य न ा व ृ ि ሧ म ᇳ य य ा
	
व त ᆼ त े
	
प ु न ः
	
॥
२ ६
॥
śukla-kṛṣṇe	gatī	hy	ete
jagataḥ	śāśvate	mate
ekayā	yāty	anāvṛttim
anyayāvartate	punaḥ
śukla—
light;	
kṛṣṇe—
darkness;	
gatī
—passing	away;	
hi—
certainly;	
ete
—all
these;	
jagataḥ
—of	the	material	world;	
śāśvate
—the	
Vedas
;	
mate
—in	the
opinion;	
ekayā
—by	one;	
yāti
—goes;	
anāvṛttim
—no	return;	
anyayā
—by	the
other;	
āvartate
—comes	back;	
punaḥ
—again.
TRANSLATION
According	to	the	Vedas,	there	are	two	ways	of	passing	from	this	world
—one	in	light	and	one	in	darkness.	When	one	passes	in	light,	he	does	not
come	back;	but	when	one	passes	in	darkness,	he	returns.
PURPORTThe	same	description	of	departure	and	return	is	quoted	by	Ācārya	Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa	from	the	
Chandogya	Upaniṣad.	
In	such	a	way,	those	who	are
fruitive	laborers	and	philosophical	speculators	from	time	immemorial	are
constantly	going	and	coming.	Actually	they	do	not	attain	ultimate	salvation,
for	they	do	not	surrender	to	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	27
न ै त े
	
स ृ त ी
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
ज ा न ᇳ य ो ग ी
	
म ु ቋ ि त
	
क ᇽ च न
	
।
त ᇿ म ा ᇰ स व ᆹ ष ु
	
क ा ल े ष ु
	
य ो ग य ु ᇧ त ो
	
भ व ा ज ु ᆼ न
	
॥
२ ७
॥
naite	sṛtī	pārtha	jānan
yogī	muhyati	kaścana
tasmāt	sarveṣu	kāleṣu
yoga-yukto	bhavārjuna
na—
never;	
ete—
all	these;	
sṛtī
—different	paths;	
pārtha
—O	son	of	Pṛthā;
jānan
—even	if	they	know;	
yogī
—the	devotees	of	the	Lord;	
muhyati—
bewildered;	
kaścana—
anyone;	
tasmāt—
therefore;	
sarveṣu
	
kāleṣu—
always;
yoga-yuktaḥ—
being	engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness;	
bhava—
just	become;
arjuna
—O	Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
The	devotees	who	know	these	two	paths,	O	Arjuna,	are	never
bewildered.	Therefore	be	always	fixed	in	devotion.
PURPORT
Kṛṣṇa	is	here	advising	Arjuna	that	he	should	not	be	disturbed	by	the
different	paths	the	soul	can	take	when	leaving	the	material	world.	A	devotee	of
the	Supreme	Lord	should	not	worry	whether	he	will	depart	either	by
arrangement	or	by	accident.	The	devotee	should	be	firmly	established	in
Krṣṇa	consciousness	and	chant	Hare	Kṛṣṇa.	He	should	know	that	concern	over
either	of	these	two	paths	is	troublesome.	The	best	way	to	be	absorbed	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	to	be	always	dovetailed	in	His	service,	and	this	will	makeone's	path	to	the	spiritual	kingdom	safe,	certain,	and	direct.	The	word	
yoga-
yukta
	is	especially	significant	in	this	verse.	One	who	is	firm	in	
yoga
	is
constantly	engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	in	all	his	activities.	Śrī	Rūpa
Gosvāmī	advises	that	one	should	be	unattached	in	the	material	world	and	that
all	affairs	should	be	steeped	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	In	this	way	one	attains
perfection.	Therefore	the	devotee	is	not	disturbed	by	these	descriptions
because	he	knows	that	his	passage	to	the	supreme	abode	is	guaranteed	by
devotional	service.
TEXT	28
व े द े ष ु
	
य ᇥ े ष ु
	
त प ः स ु
	
च ै व
	
द ा न े ष ु
	
य ᇰ प ु ᇯ य फ ल ं
	
प ् र ि द ᇾ ट म ्
	
।
अ ᇰ य े ि त
	
त ᇰ स व ᆼ ि म द ं
	
ि व ि द ᇰ व ा
	
य ो ग ी
	
प र ं
	
ᇿ थ ा न म ु प ै ि त
	
च ा ሱ म ्
	
॥
२ ८
॥
vedeṣu	yajñeṣu	tapaḥsu	caiva
dāneṣu	yat	puṇya-phalaṁ	pradiṣṭam
atyeti	tat	sarvam	idaṁ	viditvā
yogī	paraṁ	sthānam	upaiti	cādyam
vedeṣu—
in	the	study	of	the	
Vedas;	yajñeṣu—
in	the	performances	of	
yajña,
sacrifice;	
tapaḥsu—
undergoing	different	types	of	austerities;	
ca—
also;	
eva
—
certainly;	
dāneṣu—
in	giving	charities;	
yat—
that	which;	
puṇya-	phalam—
the
result	of	pious	work;	
pradiṣṭam
—directed;	
atyeti
—surpasses;	
tat
—all	those;
sarvam	idam—
all	those	described	above;	
viditvā—
knowing;	
yogī
—the
devotee;	
param—
supreme;	
sthānam—
abode;	
upaiti—
achieved	peace;	
ca
—
also;	
ādyam—
original.
TRANSLATION
A	person	who	accepts	the	path	of	devotional	service	is	not	bereft	of	the
results	derived	from	studying	the	Vedas,	performing	austere	sacrifices,
giving	charity	or	pursuing	philosophical	and	fruitive	activities.	At	the	end
he	reaches	the	supreme	abode.PURPORT
This	verse	is	the	summation	of	the	Seventh	and	Eighth	Chapters,
particularly	as	the	chapters	deal	with	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	devotional
service.	One	has	to	study	the	
Vedas	
under	the	guidance	of	the	spiritual	master
and	undergo	many	austerities	and	penances	while	living	under	his	care.	A
brahmacārī	
has	to	live	in	the	home	of	the	spiritual	master	just	like	a	servant,
and	he	must	beg	alms	from	door	to	door	and	bring	them	to	the	spiritual	master.
He	takes	food	only	under	the	master's	order,	and	if	the	master	neglects	to	call
the	student	for	food	that	day,	the	student	fasts.	These	are	some	of	the	Vedic
principles	for	observing	
brahmacarya.
After	the	student	studies	the	
Vedas	
under	the	master	for	a	period	from	five
to	twenty	years,	he	may	become	a	man	of	perfect	character.	Study	of	the	
Vedas
isnot	meant	for	the	recreation	of	armchair	speculators,	but	for	the	formation	of
character.	After	this	training,	the	
brahmacārī	
is	allowed	to	enter	into
household	life	and	marry.	When	he	is	a	householder,	he	also	has	to	perform
many	sacrifices	and	strive	for	further	enlightenment.	Then	after	retiring	from
household	life,	upon	accepting	the	order	of	
vānaprastha,	
he	undergoes	severe
penances,	such	as	living	in	forests,	dressing	with	tree	bark,	not	shaving,	etc.
By	carrying	out	the	orders	of	
brahmacārī,	
householder,	
vānaprastha	
and
finally	
sannyāsa
,	one	becomes	elevated	to	the	perfectional	stage	of	life.	Some
are	then	elevated	to	the	heavenly	kingdoms,	and	when	they	become	even	more
advanced	they	are	liberated	in	the	spiritual	sky,	either	in	the	impersonal
brahmajyoti	
or	in	the	Vaikuṇṭha	planets	or	Kṛṣṇaloka.	This	is	the	path	outlined
by	Vedic	literatures.
The	beauty	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	however,	is	that	by	one	stroke,	by
engaging	in	devotional	service,	one	can	surpass	all	rituals	of	the	different
orders	of	life.
One	should	try	to	understand	the	Seventh	and	Eighth	Chapters	of	the	
Gītā
not	by	scholarship	or	mental	speculation,	but	by	hearing	them	in	association
with	pure	devotees.	Chapters	Six	through	Twelve	are	the	essence	of	the	
Gītā.
If	one	is	fortunate	to	understand	the	
Gītā—
especially	these	middle	six	chapters
—
in	the	association	of	devotees,	then	his	life	at	once	becomes	glorified
beyond	all	penances,	sacrifices,	charities,	speculations,	etc.	One	should	hear
the	
Gītā	
from	the	devotee	because	at	the	beginning	of	the	Fourth	Chapter	it	is
stated	that	the	
Gīta	
can	only	be	perfectly	understood	by	devotees.	Hearing	theGītā	
from	devotees,	not	from	mental	speculators,	is	called	faith.	Through
association	of	devotees,	one	is	placed	in	devotional	service,	and	by	this
service	Kṛṣṇa's	activities,	form,	pastimes,	name,	etc.,	become	clear,	and	all
misgivings	are	dispelled.	Then	once	doubts	are	removed,	the	study	of	the	
Gītā
becomes	extremely	pleasurable,	and	one	develops	a	taste	and	feeling	for
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	In	the	advanced	stage,	one	falls	completely	in	love	with
Kṛṣṇa,	and	that	is	the	beginning	of	the	highest	perfectional	stage	of	life	which
prepares	the	devotee's	transferral	to	Kṛṣṇa's	abode	in	the	spiritual	sky,	Goloka
Vṛndāvana,	where	the	devotee	enters	into	eternal	happiness.
Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	Eighth	Chapter	of	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhagavad-gītā
	in	the	matter	of	Attaining	the	Supreme.Chapter-9
CHAPTER	NINE
The	Most	Confidential	Knowledge
TEXT	1
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
इ द ं
	
त ु
	
त े
	
ग ु ቋ त म ं
	
प ् र व ቎ य ा ᇸ य न स ू य व े
	
।
ᇥ ा न ं
	
ि व ᇥ ा न स ि ह त ं
	
य ᇬ ᇥ ा ᇰ व ा
	
म ो ቎ य स े ऽ श ु भ ा त ्
	
॥
१
॥
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
idaṁ	tu	te	guhyatamaṁ
pravakṣyāmy	anasūyave
jñānaṁ	vijñāna-sahitaṁyaj	jñātvā	mokṣyase	'śubhāt
śrī	bhagavan	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
idam—
this;	
tu—
but;	
te—
unto	you;	
guhyatamam—
most	confidential;	
pravakṣyāmi—
I
am	speaking;	
anasūyave—
to	the	nonenvious;	
jñānam—
knowledge;	
vijñāna
—
realized	knowledge;	
sahitam—
with;	
yat—
which;	
jñātvā—
knowing;
mokṣyase—
be	released;	
aśubhāt—
from	this	miserable	material	existence.
TRANSLATION
The	Supreme	Lord	said:	My	dear	Arjuna,	because	you	are	never
envious	of	Me,	I	shall	impart	to	you	this	most	secret	wisdom,	knowing
which	you	shall	be	relieved	of	the	miseries	of	material	existence.
PURPORT
As	a	devotee	hears	more	and	more	about	the	Supreme	Lord,	he	becomes
enlightened.	This	hearing	process	is	recommended	in	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam:	
"The	messages	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	are	full
of	potencies,	and	these	potencies	can	be	realized	if	topics	regarding	the
Supreme	Godhead	are	discussed	amongst	devotees.	This	cannot	be	achieved
by	the	association	of	mental	speculators	or	academic	scholars,	for	it	is	realized
knowledge."
The	devotees	are	constantly	engaged	in	the	Supreme	Lord's	service.	The
Lord	understands	the	mentality	and	sincerity	of	a	particular	living	entity	who
is	engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	gives	him	the	intelligence	to
understand	the	science	of	Kṛṣṇa	in	the	association	of	the	devotees.	Discussion
of	Kṛṣṇa	is	very	potent,	and	if	a	fortunate	person	has	such	association	and	tries
to	assimilate	the	knowledge,	then	he	will	surely	make	advancement	toward
spiritual	realization.	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	in	order	to	encourage	Arjuna	to	higher	and
higher	elevation	in	His	potent	service,	describes	in	this	Ninth	Chapter	matters
more	confidential	than	any	He	has	already	disclosed.
The	very	beginning	of	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
the	First	Chapter,	is	more	or	less	an
introduction	to	the	rest	of	the	book;	and	in	the	Second	and	Third	Chapters,	the
spiritual	knowledge	described	is	called	confidential.	Topics	discussed	in	the
Seventh	and	Eighth	Chapters	are	specifically	related	to	devotional	service,	and
because	they	bring	enlightenment	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	they	are	calledmore	confidential.	But	the	matters	which	are	described	in	the	Ninth	Chapter
deal	with	unalloyed,	pure	devotion.	Therefore	this	is	called	the	most
confidential.	One	who	is	situated	in	the	most	confidential	knowledge	of	Kṛṣṇa
is	naturally	transcendental;	he	therefore	has	no	material	pangs,	although	he	is
in	the	material	world.	In	the	
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu	
it	is	said	that	although
one	who	has	a	sincere	desire	to	render	loving	service	to	the	Supreme	Lord	is
situated	in	the	conditional	state	of	material	existence,	he	is	to	be	considered
liberated.	Similarly,	we	shall	find	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
Tenth	Chapter,	that
anyone	who	is	engaged	in	that	way	is	a	liberated	person.
Now	this	first	verse	has	specific	significance.	Knowledge	
(idaṁ	jñānam)
refers	to	pure	devotional	service,	which	consists	of	nine	different	activities:
hearing,	chanting,	remembering,	serving,	worshiping,	praying,	obeying,
maintaining	friendship	and	surrendering	everything.	By	the	practice	of	these
nine	elements	of	devotional	service	one	is	elevated	to	spiritual	consciousness,
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	At	the	time	when	one's	heart	is	cleared	of	the	material
contamination,	one	can	understand	this	science	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Simply	to
understand	that	a	living	entity	is	not	material	is	not	sufficient.	That	may	be	the
beginning	of	spiritual	realization,	but	one	should	recognize	the	difference
between	activities	of	the	body	and	spiritual	activities	by	which	one
understands	that	he	is	not	the	body.
In	the	Seventh	Chapter	we	have	already	discussed	the	opulent	potency	of
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	His	different	energies,	the	inferior	and
superior	natures,	and	all	this	material	manifestation.	Now	in	Chapters	Nine
and	Ten	the	glories	of	the	Lord	will	be	delineated.
The	Sanskrit	word	
anasūyave	
in	this	verse	is	also	very	significant.
Generally	the	commentators,	even	if	they	are	highly	scholarly,	are	all	envious
of	Kṛṣṇa,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Even	the	most	erudite	scholars
write	on	
Bhagavad-gītā	
very	inaccurately.	Because	they	are	envious	of	Kṛṣṇa,
their	commentaries	are	useless.	The	commentaries	given	by	devotees	of	the
Lord	are	bona	fide.	No	one	can	explain	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
or	give	perfect
knowledge	of	Kṛṣṇa	if	he	is	envious.	One	who	criticizes	the	character	of
Kṛṣṇa	without	knowing	Him	is	a	fool.	So	such	commentaries	should	be	very
carefully	avoided.	For	one	who	understands	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	the	pure	and	transcendental	Personality,	these
chapters	will	be	very	beneficial.
TEXT	2र ा ज ि व ሱ ा
	
र ा ज ग ु ቋ ं
	
प ि व त ् र ि म द म ु ሧ म म ्
	
।
प ् र ᇰ य ᇤ ा व ग म ं
	
ध ᇸ य ᆾ
	
स ु स ु ख ं
	
क त ु ᆼ म ᇼ य य म ्
	
॥
२
॥
rāja-vidyā	rāja-guhyaṁ
pavitram	idam	uttamam
pratyakṣāvagamaṁ	dharmyaṁ
susukhaṁ	kartum	avyayam
rāja-vidyā—
the	king	of	education;	
rāja-guhyam—
the	king	of	confidential
knowledge;	
pavitram—
the	purest;	
idam—
this;	
uttamam—
transcendental;
pratyakṣa—
directly	experienced;	
avagamam—
understood;	
dharmyam—
the
principle	of	religion;	
susukham—
very	happy;	
kartum—
to	execute;	
avyayam
—
everlasting.
TRANSLATION
This	knowledge	is	the	king	of	education,	the	most	secret	of	all	secrets.	It
is	the	purest	knowledge,	and	because	it	gives	direct	perception	of	the	self
by	realization,	it	is	the	perfection	of	religion.	It	is	everlasting,	and	it	is
joyfully	performed.
PURPORT
This	chapter	of	
Bhagavad-gītā
	is	called	the	king	of	education	because	it	is
the	essence	of	all	doctrines	and	philosophies	explained	before.	There	are
seven	principal	philosophers	in	India:	Gautama,	Kaṇāda,	Kapila,	Yājñavalkya,
Śāṇḍilya,	Vaiśvānara,	and,	finally,	Vyāsadeva,	the	author	of	the	
Vedānta-sūtra.
So	there	is	no	dearth	of	knowledge	in	the	field	of	philosophy	or	transcendental
knowledge.	Now	the	Lord	says	that	this	Ninth	Chapter	is	the	king	of	all	such
knowledge,	the	essence	of	all	knowledge	that	can	be	derived	from	the	study	of
the	
Vedas	
and	different	kinds	of	philosophy.	It	is	the	most	confidential	because
confidential	or	transcendental	knowledge	involves	understanding	the
difference	between	the	soul	and	the	body.	And	the	king	of	all	confidential
knowledge	culminates	in	devotional	service.
Generally,	people	are	not	educated	in	this	confidential	knowledge;	they	are
educated	in	external	knowledge.	As	far	as	ordinary	education	is	concerned,
people	are	involved	with	so	many	departments:	politics,	sociology,	physics,chemistry,	mathematics,	astronomy,	engineering,	etc.	There	are	so	many
departments	of	knowledge	all	over	the	world	and	many	huge	universities,	but
there	is,	unfortunately,	no	university	or	educational	institution	where	the
science	of	the	spirit	soul	is	instructed.	Yet	the	soul	is	the	most	important	part
of	this	body;	without	the	presence	of	the	soul,	the	body	has	no	value.	Still
people	are	placing	great	stress	on	the	bodily	necessities	of	life,	not	caring	for
the	vital	soul.
The	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
especially	from	the	Second	Chapter	on,	stresses	the
importance	of	the	soul.	In	the	very	beginning,	the	Lord	says	that	this	body	is
perishable	and	that	the	soul	is	not	perishable.	That	is	a	confidential	part	of
knowledge:	simply	knowing	that	spirit	soul	is	different	from	this	body	and	that
its	nature	is	immutable,	indestructible	and	eternal.	But	that	gives	no	positive
information	about	the	soul.	Sometimes	people	are	under	the	impression	that
the	soul	is	different	from	the	body	and	that	when	the	body	is	finished,	or	one
is	liberated	from	the	body,	the	soul	remains	in	a	void	and	becomes	impersonal.
But	actually	that	is	not	the	fact.	How	can	the	soul,	which	is	so	active	within
this	body,	be	inactive	after	being	liberated	from	the	body?	It	is	always	active.
If	it	is	eternal,	then	it	is	eternally	active,	and	its	activities	in	the	spiritual
kingdom	are	the	most	confidential	part	of	spiritual	knowledge.	These	activities
of	the	spirit	soul	are	therefore	indicated	here	as	constituting	the	king	of	all
knowledge,	the	most	confidential	part	of	all	knowledge.
This	knowledge	is	the	purest	form	of	all	activities,	as	is	explained	in	Vedic
literature.	In	the	
Padma	Purāṇa,	
man's	sinful	activities	have	been	analyzed
and	are	shown	to	be	the	results	of	sin	after	sin.	Those	who	are	engaged	in
fruitive	activities	are	entangled	in	different	stages	and	forms	of	sinful
reactions.	For	instance,	when	the	seed	of	a	particular	tree	is	sown,	the	tree
does	not	appear	immediately	to	grow;	it	takes	some	time.	It	is	first	a	small,
sprouting	plant,	then	it	assumes	the	form	of	a	tree,	then	it	flowers,	bears	fruit,
and,	when	it	is	complete,	the	flowers	and	fruits	are	enjoyed	by	persons	who
have	sown	the	seed	of	the	tree.	Similarly,	a	man	performs	a	sinful	act,	and	like
a	seed	it	takes	time	to	fructify.	There	are	different	stages.	The	sinful	action
may	have	already	stopped	within	the	individual,	but	the	results	or	the	fruit	of
that	sinful	action	are	still	enjoyed.	There	are	sins	which	are	still	in	the	form	of
a	seed,	and	there	are	others	which	are	already	fructified	and	are	giving	us	fruit,
which	we	are	enjoying	as	distress	and	pain,	as	explained	in	the	twentieth	verse
of	the	Seventh	Chapter.
A	person	who	has	completely	ended	the	reactions	of	all	sinful	activities	and
who	is	fully	engaged	in	pious	activities,	being	freed	from	the	duality	of	this
material	world,	becomes	engaged	in	devotional	service	to	the	SupremePersonality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa.	In	other	words,	those	who	are	actually
engaged	in	the	devotional	service	of	the	Supreme	Lord	are	already	freed	from
all	reactions.	For	those	who	are	engaged	in	the	devotional	service	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	all	sinful	reactions,	whether	fructified,	in
the	stock,	or	in	the	form	of	a	seed,	gradually	vanish.	Therefore	the	purifying
potency	of	devotional	service	is	very	strong,	and	it	is	called	
pavitram
uttamam,	
the	purest.	
Uttamam	
means	transcendental.	
Tamas	
means	this
material	world	or	darkness,	and	
uttamam	
means	that	which	is	transcendental
to	material	activities.	Devotional	activities	are	never	to	be	considered	material,
although	sometimes	it	appears	that	devotees	are	engaged	just	like	ordinary
men.	One	who	can	see	and	is	familiar	with	devotional	service,	however,	will
know	that	they	are	not	material	activities.	They	are	all	spiritual	and
devotional,	uncontaminated	by	the	material	modes	of	nature.
It	is	said	that	the	execution	of	devotional	service	is	so	perfect	that	one	can
perceive	the	results	directly.	This	direct	result	is	actually	perceived,	and	we
have	practical	experience	that	any	person	who	is	chanting	the	holy	names	of
Kṛṣṇa	(Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/	Hare	Rāma,	Hare
Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,	Hare	Hare)	in	course	of	time	feels	some	transcendental
pleasure	and	very	quickly	becomes	purified	of	all	material	contamination.
This	is	actually	seen.	Furthermore,	if	one	engages	not	only	in	hearing	but	in
trying	to	broadcast	the	message	of	devotional	activities	as	well,	or	if	he
engages	himself	in	helping	the	missionary	activities	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,
he	gradually	feels	spiritual	progress.	This	advancement	in	spiritual	life	does
not	depend	on	any	kind	of	previous	education	or	qualification.	The	method
itself	is	so	pure	that	by	simply	engaging	in	it	one	becomes	pure.
In	the	
Vedānta-sūtra
	this	is	also	described	in	the	following	words:	
prakāśaś
ca	karmaṇy	abhyāsāt.
	"Devotional	service	is	so	potent	that	simply	by
engaging	in	the	activities	of	devotional	service,	one	becomes	enlightened
without	a	doubt."	Nārada,	who	happened	to	be	the	son	of	a	maidservant,	had
no	education,	nor	was	he	born	into	a	high	family.	But	when	his	mother	was
engaged	in	serving	great	devotees,	Nārada	also	became	engaged,	and
sometimes,	in	the	absence	of	his	mother,	he	would	serve	the	great	devotees
himself.	Nārada	personally	says,	"Once	only,	by	their	permission,	I	took	the
remnants	of	their	food,	and	by	so	doing	all	my	sins	were	at	once	eradicated.
Thus	being	engaged,	I	became	purified	in	heart,	and	at	that	time	the	very
nature	of	the	transcendentalist	became	attractive	to	me."	(
Bhāg.	
1.5.25)
Nārada	tells	his	disciple	Vyāsadeva	that	in	a	previous	life	he	was	engaged	as	a
boy	servant	of	purified	devotees	during	four	months	of	their	stay	and	that	hewas	intimately	associating	with	them.	Sometimes	those	sages	left	remnants	of
food	on	their	dishes,	and	the	boy,	who	would	wash	their	dishes,	wanted	to
taste	the	remnants.	So	he	asked	the	great	devotees	whether	he	could	eat	them,
and	they	gave	their	permission.	Nārada	then	ate	those	remnants	and
consequently	became	freed	from	all	sinful	reactions.	As	he	went	on	eating,	he
gradually	became	as	purehearted	as	the	sages,	and	he	gradually	developed	the
same	taste.	The	great	devotees	relished	the	taste	of	unceasing	devotional
service	of	the	Lord,	hearing,	chanting,	etc.,	and	by	developing	the	same	taste,
Nārada	wanted	also	to	hear	and	chant	the	glories	of	the	Lord.	Thus	by
associating	with	the	sages,	he	developed	a	great	desire	for	devotional	service.
Therefore	he	quotes	from	the	
Vedānta-sūtra	(prakāśaś	ca	karmaṇy	abhyāsāt):
If	one	is	engaged	simply	in	the	acts	of	devotional	service,	everything	is
revealed	to	him	automatically,	and	he	can	understand.	This	is	called	
prakāśaḥ,
directly	perceived.
Nārada	was	actually	a	son	of	a	maidservant.	He	had	no	opportunity	to	go	to
school.	He	was	simply	assisting	his	mother,	and	fortunately	his	mother
rendered	some	service	to	the	devotees.	The	child	Nārada	also	got	the
opportunity	and	simply	by	association	achieved	the	highest	goal	of	all
religions,	devotional	service.	In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
it	is	said	that
religious	people	generally	do	not	know	that	the	highest	perfection	of	religion
is	the	attainment	of	the	stage	of	devotional	service.	Generally	Vedic
knowledge	is	required	for	the	understanding	of	the	path	of	self-realization.	But
here,	although	he	was	not	educated	in	the	Vedic	principle,	Nārada	acquired	the
highest	results	of	Vedic	study.	This	process	is	so	potent	that	even	without
performing	the	religious	process	regularly,	one	can	be	raised	to	the	highest
perfection.	How	is	this	possible?	This	is	also	confirmed	in	Vedic	literature:
ācāryavān	puruṣo	veda.	
One	who	is	in	association	with	great	
ācāryas
,	even	if
he	is	not	educated	or	has	not	studied	the	
Vedas,	
can	become	familiar	with	all
the	knowledge	necessary	for	realization.
The	process	of	devotional	service	is	a	very	happy	one.	Why?	Devotional
service	consists	of	
śravaṇaṁ	kīrtanaṁ	viṣṇoḥ,	
so	one	can	simply	hear	the
chanting	of	the	glories	of	the	Lord	or	can	attend	philosophical	lectures	on
transcendental	knowledge	given	by	authorized	
ācāryas
.	Simply	by	sitting,	one
can	learn;	then	one	can	eat	the	remnants	of	the	food	offered	to	God,	nice
palatable	dishes.	In	every	state	devotional	service	is	joyful.	One	can	execute
devotional	service	even	in	the	most	poverty-stricken	condition.	The	Lord	says,
patraṁ	puṣpaṁ	phalam:	
He	is	ready	to	accept	from	the	devotee	any	kind	of
offering,	never	mind	what.	Even	a	leaf,	a	flower,	a	bit	of	fruit,	or	a	little	water,which	are	all	available	in	every	part	of	the	world,	can	be	offered	by	
any
person,	regardless	of	social	position,	and	will	be	accepted	if	offered	with	love.
There	are	many	instances	in	history.	Simply	by	tasting	the	
tulasī	
leaves
offered	to	the	lotus	feet	of	the	Lord,	great	sages	like	Sanatkumāra	became
great	devotees.	Therefore	the	devotional	process	is	very	nice,	and	it	can	be
executed	in	a	happy	mood.	God	accepts	only	the	love	with	which	things	are
offered	to	Him.
It	is	said	here	that	this	devotional	service	is	eternally	existing.	It	is	not	as
the	Māyāvādī	philosophers	claim.	They	sometimes	take	to	so-called
devotional	service,	and	as	long	as	they	are	not	liberated	they	continue	their
devotional	service,	but	at	the	end,	when	they	become	liberated,	they	"become
one	with	God."	Such	temporary	time-serving	devotional	service	is	not
accepted	as	pure	devotional	service.	Actual	devotional	service	continues	even
after	liberation.	When	the	devotee	goes	to	the	spiritual	planet	in	the	kingdom
of	God,	he	is	also	engaged	there	in	serving	the	Supreme	Lord.	He	does	not	try
to	become	one	with	the	Supreme	Lord.
As	it	will	be	seen,	actual	devotional	service	begins	after	liberation.	So	in
Bhagavad-gītā	
it	is	said,	
brahma-bhūta.	
After	being	liberated,	or	being
situated	in	the	Brahman	position,	one's	devotional	service	begins.	By
executing	devotional	service,	one	can	understand	the	Supreme	Lord.	No	one
can	understand	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	by	executing	
karma-
yoga,	jñāna,	
or	
aṣṭāṅga-yoga	
or	any	other	
yoga	
independently.	Without
coming	to	the	stage	of	devotional	service,	one	cannot	understand	what	is	the
Personality	of	Godhead.	In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
it	is	also	confirmed	that
when	one	becomes	purified	by	executing	the	process	of	devotional	service,
especially	by	hearing	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
or	
Bhagavad-gītā	
from	realized
souls,	then	he	can	understand	the	science	of	Kṛṣṇa	or	the	science	of	God.
Evaṁ	prasanna-manaso	bhagavad-bhakti-yogataḥ.	
When	one's	heart	is
cleared	of	all	nonsense,	then	one	can	understand	what	God	is.	Thus	the
process	of	devotional	service,	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	is	the	king	of	all
education	and	the	king	of	all	confidential	knowledge.	It	is	the	purest	form	of
religion,	and	it	can	be	executed	joyfully	without	difficulty.	Therefore	one
should	adopt	it.
TEXT	3
अ श ् र ራ ध ा न ा ः
	
प ु ኄ ष ा
	
ध म ᆼ ᇿ य ा ᇿ य
	
प र ᇳ त प
	
।
अ प ् र ा ᇴ य
	
म ा ं
	
ि न व त ᆼ ᇳ त े
	
म ृ ᇰ य ु स ं स ा र व ᇰ म ᆼ ि न
	
॥
३
॥aśraddadhānāḥ	puruṣā
dharmasyāsya	parantapa
aprāpya	māṁ	nivartante
mṛtyu-saṁsāra-vartmani
aśraddadhānāḥ—
those	who	are	faithless;	
puruṣāḥ
—such	persons;
dharmasya—
of	this	process	of	religion;	
asya—
of	it;	
parantapa
—O	killer	of
the	enemies;	
aprāpya—
without	obtaining;	
mām—
Me;	
nivartante—
come	back;
mṛtyu—
death;	
saṁsāra—
material	existence;	
vartmani—
on	the	path	of.
TRANSLATION
Those	who	are	not	faithful	on	the	path	of	devotional	service	cannot
attain	Me,	O	conqueror	of	foes,	but	return	to	birth	and	death	in	this
material	world.
PURPORT
The	faithless	cannot	accomplish	this	process	of	devotional	service;	that	is
the	purport	of	this	verse.	Faith	is	created	by	association	with	devotees.
Unfortunate	people,	even	after	hearing	all	the	evidence	of	Vedic	literature
from	great	personalities,	still	have	no	faith	in	God.	They	are	hesitant	and
cannot	stay	fixed	in	the	devotional	service	of	the	Lord.	Thus	faith	is	a	most
important	factor	for	progress	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	In	the	
Caitanya-
caritāmṛta
	it	is	said	that	one	should	have	complete	conviction	that	simply	by
serving	the	Supreme	Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	he	can	achieve	all	perfection.	That	is
called	real	faith.	In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
	(3.4.12)	it	is	stated	that	by	giving
water	to	the	root	of	a	tree,	its	branches,	twigs	and	leaves	become	satisfied,	and
by	supplying	food	to	the	stomach	all	the	senses	of	the	body	become	satisfied,
and,	similarly,	by	engaging	in	the	transcendental	service	of	the	Supreme	Lord,
all	the	demigods	and	all	the	living	entities	automatically	become	satisfied.
After	reading	
Bhagavad-gītā	
one	should	promptly	come	to	the	conclusion
of	
Bhagavad-gītā:	
one	should	give	up	all	other	engagements	and	adopt	the
service	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	Kṛṣṇa,	the	Personality	of	Godhead.	If	one	is
convinced	of	this	philosophy	of	life,	that	is	faith.	Now	the	development	of	that
faith	is	the	process	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
There	are	three	divisions	of	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	men.	In	the	third	class	arethose	who	have	no	faith.	If	they	are	engaged	in	devotional	service	officially,
for	some	ulterior	purpose,	they	cannot	achieve	the	highest	perfectional	stage.
Most	probably	they	will	slip,	after	some	time.	They	may	become	engaged,	but
because	they	haven't	complete	conviction	and	faith,	it	is	very	difficult	for	them
to	continue	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	We	have	practical	experience	in
discharging	our	missionary	activity	that	some	people	come	and	apply
themselves	to	the	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	with	some	hidden	motive,	and	as	soon
as	they	are	economically	a	little	well-situated,	they	give	up	this	process	and
take	to	their	old	ways	again.	It	is	only	by	faith	that	one	can	advance	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	As	far	as	the	development	of	faith	is	concerned,	one	who	is
well	versed	in	the	literatures	of	devotional	service	and	has	attained	the	stage	of
firm	faith	is	called	a	first-class	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	And	in	the
second	class	are	those	who	are	not	very	advanced	in	understanding	the
devotional	scriptures	but	who	automatically	have	firm	faith	that	Kṛṣṇa	
bhakti
or	service	to	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	best	course	and	so	in	good	faith	have	taken	it	up.
Thus	they	are	superior	to	the	third	class	who	have	neither	perfect	knowledge
of	the	scriptures	nor	good	faith	but	by	association	and	simplicity	are	trying	to
follow.	The	third-class	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	may	fall	down,	but
when	one	is	in	the	second	class	or	first	class,	he	does	not	fall	down.	One	in	the
first	class	will	surely	make	progress	and	achieve	the	result	at	the	end.	As	far	as
the	third-class	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	concerned,	although	he	has
faith	in	the	conviction	that	devotional	service	to	Kṛṣṇa	is	very	good,	he	has	no
knowledge	of	Kṛṣṇa	through	the	scriptures	like	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
and
Bhagavad-gītā.	
Sometimes	these	third-class	persons	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness
have	some	tendency	toward	
karma-yoga	
and	
jñāna-yoga,	
and	sometimes	they
are	disturbed,	but	as	soon	as	the	infection	of	
karma-yoga
	or	
jñāna-yoga
	is
vanquished,	they	become	second-class	or	first-class	persons	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	Faith	in	Kṛṣṇa	is	also	divided	into	three	stages	and	described	in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.	
First-class	attachment,	second-class	attachment,	and
third-class	attachment	are	also	explained	in	
Śrīmad-	Bhāgavatam	
in	the
Eleventh	Canto.	Those	who	have	no	faith	even	after	hearing	about	Kṛṣṇa	and
the	excellence	of	devotional	service,	who	think	that	it	is	simply	eulogy,	find
the	path	very	difficult,	even	if	they	are	supposedly	engaged	in	devotional
service.	For	them	there	is	very	little	hope	in	gaining	perfection.	Thus	faith	is
very	important	in	the	discharge	of	devotional	service.
TEXT	4म य ा
	
त त ि म द ं
	
स व ᆾ
	
ज ग द ᇼ य ᇧ त म ू ि त ᆼ न ा
	
।
म ᇰ ᇿ थ ा ि न
	
स व ᆼ भ ू त ा ि न
	
न
	
च ा ह ं
	
त े ᇾ व व ि ᇿ थ त ः
	
॥
४
॥
mayā	tatam	idaṁ	sarvaṁ
jagad	avyakta-mūrtinā
mat-sthāni	sarva-bhūtāni
na	cāhaṁ	teṣv	avasthitaḥ
mayā
—by	Me;	
tatam
—spread;	
idam
—all	these	manifestations;	
sarvam
—
all;	
jagat
—cosmic	manifestation;	
avyakta-mūrtinā—
unmanifested	form;	
mat-
sthāni—
unto	Me;
	sarva-bhūtāni—
all	living	entities;	
na
—not;	
ca
—also;	
aham
—	
I;	
teṣu
—in	them;	
avasthitaḥ—
situated.
TRANSLATION
By	Me,	in	My	unmanifested	form,	this	entire	universe	is	pervaded.	All
beings	are	in	Me,	but	I	am	not	in	them.
PURPORT
The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is	not	perceivable	through	the	gross
material	senses.	It	is	said	that	Lord	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa's	name,	fame,	pastimes,	etc.,
cannot	be	understood	by	material	senses.	Only	to	one	who	is	engaged	in	pure
devotional	service	under	proper	guidance	is	He	revealed.	In	the	
Brahma-
saṁhitā	
it	is	stated,	
premāñjanacchurita....	
One	can	see	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	Govinda,	always	within	himself	and	outside	himself
if	he	has	developed	the	transcendental	loving	attitude	towards	Him.	Thus	for
people	in	general	He	is	not	visible.	Here	it	is	said	that	although	He	is	all-
pervading,	everywhere	present,	He	is	yet	not	conceivable	by	the	material
senses.	But	actually,	although	we	cannot	see	Him,	everything	is	resting	in
Him.	As	we	have	discussed	in	the	Seventh	Chapter,	the	entire	material	cosmic
manifestation	is	only	a	combination	of	His	two	different	energies,	the	superior
spiritual	energy	and	the	inferior	material	energy.	Just	as	the	sunshine	is	spread
all	over	the	universe,	the	energy	of	the	Lord	is	spread	all	over	the	creation,	and
everything	is	resting	in	that	energy.
Yet	one	should	not	conclude	that	because	He	is	spread	all	over	He	has	lost
His	personal	existence.	To	refute	such	argument	the	Lord	says,	"I	ameverywhere,	and	everything	is	in	Me,	but	still	I	am	aloof."	For	example,	a	king
heads	a	government	which	is	but	the	manifestation	of	the	king's	energy;	the
different	governmental	departments	are	nothing	but	the	energies	of	the	king,
and	each	department	is	resting	on	the	king's	power.	But	still	one	cannot	expect
the	king	to	be	present	in	every	department	personally.	That	is	a	crude	example.
Similarly,	all	the	manifestations	that	we	see,	and	everything	that	exists	both	in
this	material	world	and	in	the	spiritual	world,	are	resting	on	the	energy	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	The	creation	takes	place	by	the	diffusion	of
His	different	energies,	and,	as	is	stated	in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
He	is
everywhere	present	by	His	personal	representation,	the	diffusion	of	His
different	energies.
TEXT	5
न
	
च
	
म ᇰ ᇿ थ ा ि न
	
भ ू त ा ि न
	
प ᇽ य
	
म े
	
य ो ग म ै ᇽ व र म ्
	
।
भ ू त भ ृ ᇳ न
	
च
	
भ ू त ᇿ थ ो
	
म म ा ᇰ म ा
	
भ ू त भ ा व न ः
	
॥
५
॥
na	ca	mat-sthāni	bhūtāni
paśya	me	yogam	aiśvaram
bhūta-bhṛn	na	ca	bhūta-stho
mamātmā	bhūta-bhāvanaḥ
na—
never;	
ca—
also;	
mat-sthāni—
situated	in	Me;	
bhūtāni—
all	creation;
paśya—
just	see;	
me—
My;
	yogam	aiśvaram—
inconceivable	mystic	power;
bhūta-bhṛt—
maintainer	of	all	living	entities;	
na—
never;	
ca—
also;	
bhūta-
sthaḥ—
in	the	cosmic	manifestation;	
mama—
My;	
ātmā—
Self;	
bhūta-
bhāvanaḥ—
isthe	source	of	all	manifestations.
TRANSLATION
And	yet	everything	that	is	created	does	not	rest	in	Me.	Behold	My
mystic	opulence!	Although	I	am	the	maintainer	of	all	living	entities,	and
although	I	am	everywhere,	still	My	Self	is	the	very	source	of	creation.
PURPORTThe	Lord	says	that	everything	is	resting	on	Him.	This	should	not	be
misunderstood.	The	Lord	is	not	directly	concerned	with	the	maintenance	and
sustenance	of	this	material	manifestation.	Sometimes	we	see	a	picture	of	Atlas
holding	the	globe	on	his	shoulders;	he	seems	to	be	very	tired,	holding	this
great	earthly	planet.	Such	an	image	should	not	be	entertained	in	connection
with	Kṛṣṇa's	upholding	this	created	universe.	He	says	that	although	everything
is	resting	on	Him,	still	He	is	aloof.	The	planetary	systems	are	floating	in
space,	and	this	space	is	the	energy	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	But	He	is	different
from	space.	He	is	differently	situated.	Therefore	the	Lord	says,	"Although
they	are	situated	on	My	inconceivable	energy,	still,	as	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead,	I	am	aloof	from	them."	This	is	the	inconceivable	opulence	of	the
Lord.
In	the	Vedic	dictionary	it	is	said,	"The	Supreme	Lord	is	performing
inconceivably	wonderful	pastimes,	displaying	His	energy.	His	person	is	full	of
different	potent	energies,	and	His	determination	is	itself	actual	fact.	In	this
way	the	Personality	of	Godhead	is	to	be	understood."	We	may	think	to	do
something,	but	there	are	so	many	impediments,	and	sometimes	it	is	not
possible	to	do	as	we	like.	But	when	Kṛṣṇa	wants	to	do	something,	simply	by
His	willing,	everything	is	performed	so	perfectly	that	one	cannot	imagine	how
it	is	being	done.	The	Lord	explains	this	fact:	although	He	is	the	maintainer	and
sustainer	of	all	material	manifestation,	He	does	not	touch	this	material
manifestation.	Simply	by	His	supreme	will	everything	is	created,	everything	is
sustained,	everything	is	maintained,	and	everything	is	annihilated.	There	is	no
difference	between	His	mind	and	Himself	(as	there	is	a	difference	between
ourselves	and	our	present	material	mind)	because	He	is	absolute	spirit.
Simultaneously	the	Lord	is	present	in	everything;	yet	the	common	man	cannot
understand	how	He	is	also	present	personally.	He	is	different	from	this
material	manifestation,	yet	everything	is	resting	on	Him.	This	is	explained
here	as	
yogam	aiśvaram,	
the	mystic	power	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.
TEXT	6
य थ ा क ा श ि ᇿ थ त ो
	
ि न ᇰ य ं
	
व ा य ु ः
	
स व ᆼ त ् र ग ो
	
म ह ा न ्
	
।
त थ ा
	
स व ा ᆼ ि ण
	
भ ू त ा ि न
	
म ᇰ ᇿ थ ा न ी ᇰ य ु प ध ा र य
	
॥
६
॥
yathākāśa-sthito	nityaṁ
vāyuḥ	sarvatra-go	mahāntathā	sarvāṇi	bhūtāni
mat-sthānīty	upadhāraya
yathā
—as	much	as;	
ākāśa-sthitaḥ—
situated	in	space;	
nityam—
always;
vāyuḥ
—wind;	
sarvatra-gaḥ—
blowing	everywhere;	
mahān—
great;	
tathā—
similarly;	
sarvāṇi
—everything,	
bhūtāni—
created	beings;	
mat-sthāni—
situated
in	Me;	
iti—
thus;	
upadhāraya—
try	to	understand.
TRANSLATION
As	the	mighty	wind,	blowing	everywhere,	always	rests	in	ethereal
space,	know	that	in	the	same	manner	all	beings	rest	in	Me.
PURPORT
For	the	ordinary	person	it	is	almost	inconceivable	how	the	huge	material
creation	is	resting	in	Him.	But	the	Lord	is	giving	an	example	which	may	help
us	to	understand.	Space	is	the	biggest	manifestation	we	can	conceive.	The
cosmic	manifestation	rests	in	space.	Space	permits	the	movement	of	even	the
atoms	and	on	up	to	the	greatest	planets,	the	sun	and	the	moon.	Although	the
sky	(or	wind	or	air)	is	great,	still	it	is	situated	within	space.	Space	is	not
beyond	the	sky.
Similarly,	all	the	wonderful	cosmic	manifestations	are	existing	by	the
supreme	will	of	God,	and	all	of	them	are	subordinate	to	that	supreme	will.	As
we	generally	say,	not	a	blade	of	grass	moves	without	the	will	of	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.	Thus	everything	is	moving	under	His	will:	by	His
will	everything	is	being	created,	everything	is	being	maintained,	and
everything	is	being	annihilated.	Still	He	is	aloof	from	everything,	as	space	is
always	aloof	from	the	activities	of	the	atmosphere.	In	the	
Upaniṣads,	
it	is
stated,	"It	is	out	of	the	fear	of	the	Supreme	Lord	that	the	wind	is	blowing."	In
the	
Garga	Upaniṣad	
also	it	is	stated,	"By	the	supreme	order,	under	the
superintendence	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	the	moon,	the	sun
and	the	great	planets	are	moving."	In	the	
Brahma-	saṁhitā	
this	is	also	stated.
There	is	also	a	description	of	the	movement	of	the	sun,	and	it	is	said	that	the
sun	is	considered	to	be	one	of	the	eyes	of	the	Supreme	Lord	and	that	it	has
immense	potency	to	diffuse	heat	and	light.	Still	it	is	moving	in	its	prescribed
orbit	by	the	order	and	the	supreme	will	of	Govinda.	So,	from	the	Vedicliterature	we	can	find	evidence	that	this	material	manifestation,	which	appears
to	us	to	be	very	wonderful	and	great,	is	under	the	complete	control	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	This	will	be	further	explained	in	the	later
verses	of	this	chapter.
TEXT	7
स व ᆼ भ ू त ा ि न
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
प ् र क ृ ि त ं
	
य ा ि ᇳ त
	
म ा ि म क ा म ्
	
।
क ᇺ प ᇤ य े
	
प ु न ᇿ त ा ि न
	
क ᇺ प ा द ौ
	
ि व स ृ ज ा ᇸ य ह म ्
	
॥
७
॥
sarva-bhūtāni	kaunteya
prakṛtiṁ	yānti	māmikām
kalpa-kṣaye	punas	tāni
kalpādau	visṛjāmy	aham
sarva-bhūtāni—
all	created	entities;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of	Kuntī;
	prakṛtim—
nature;	
yānti—
enter;	
māmikām—
unto	Me;	
kalpa-kṣaye—
at	the	end	of	the
millennium;	
punaḥ—
again;	
tāni—
all	those;	
kalpa-ādau—
in	the	beginning	of
the	millennium;	
visṛjāmi
—I	create;	
aham
—I.
TRANSLATION
O	son	of	Kuntī,	at	the	end	of	the	millennium	every	material
manifestation	enters	into	My	nature,	and	at	the	beginning	of	another
millennium,	by	My	potency	I	again	create.
PURPORT
The	creation,	maintenance	and	annihilation	of	this	material	cosmic
manifestation	is	completely	dependent	on	the	supreme	will	of	the	Personality
of	Godhead.	"At	the	end	of	the	millennium"	means	at	the	death	of	Brahmā.
Brahmā	lives	for	one	hundred	years,	and	his	one	day	is	calculated	at
4,300,000,000	of	our	earthly	years.	His	night	is	of	the	same	duration.	His
month	consists	of	thirty	such	days	and	nights,	and	his	year	of	twelve	months.
After	one	hundred	such	years,	when	Brahmā	dies,	the	devastation	or
annihilation	takes	place;	this	means	that	the	energy	manifested	by	theSupreme	Lord	is	again	wound	up	in	Himself.	Then	again,	when	there	is	need
to	manifest	the	cosmic	world,	it	is	done	by	His	will:	"Although	I	am	one,	I
shall	become	many."	This	is	the	Vedic	aphorism.	He	expands	Himself	in	this
material	energy,	and	the	whole	cosmic	manifestation	again	takes	place.
TEXT	8
प ् र क ् र ि त ं
	
ᇿ व ा म व ᇾ ट ᇷ य
	
ि व स ् र ज ा ि म
	
प ु न ः
	
प ु न ः
	
।
भ ू ᇰ ग ् र ा म
	
ि म म ं
	
ᇧ ᆻत ᇿ त ् र म व श म
	
प ् र क ृ त े व ᆼ श ा त ्
॥
८
॥
prakṛtiṁ	svām	avaṣṭabhya
visṛjāmi	punaḥ	punaḥ
bhūta-grāmam	imaṁ	kṛtsnam
avaśaṁ	prakṛter	vaśāt
prakṛtim—
material	nature;	
svām—
of	My	personal	self;	
avaṣṭabhya—
enter
in;	
visṛjāmi—
create;	
punaḥ	punaḥ—
again,	again;	
bhūta-grāmam—
all	these
cosmic	manifestations;	
imam—
this;	
kṛtsnam—
total;	
avaśam—
automatically;
prakṛteḥ—
by	the	force	of	nature;	
vaśāt—
under	obligation.
TRANSLATION
The	whole	cosmic	order	is	under	Me.	By	My	will	it	is	manifested	again
and	again,	and	by	My	will	it	is	annihilated	at	the	end.
PURPORT
This	matter	is	the	manifestation	of	the	inferior	energy	of	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.	This	has	already	been	explained	several	times.	At	the
creation,	the	material	energy	is	let	loose	as	
mahat-tattva,	
into	which	the	Lord
as	His	first	
Puruṣa	
incarnation,	Mahā-Viṣṇu,	enters.	He	lies	within	the	Causal
Ocean	and	breathes	out	innumerable	universes,	and	into	each	universe	the
Lord	again	enters	as	Garbhodakaśāyī	Viṣṇu.	Each	universe	is	in	that	way
created.	He	still	further	manifests	Himself	as	Kṣīrodakaśāyī	Viṣṇu,	and	that
Viṣṇu	enters	into	everything-even	into	the	minute	atom.	This	fact	is	explained
here.	He	enters	into	everything.Now,	as	far	as	the	living	entities	are	concerned,	they	are	impregnated	into
this	material	nature,	and	as	a	result	of	their	past	deeds	they	take	different
positions.	Thus	the	activities	of	this	material	world	begin.	The	activities	of	the
different	species	of	living	beings	are	begun	from	the	very	moment	of	the
creation.	It	is	not	that	all	is	evolved.	The	different	species	of	life	are	created
immediately	along	with	the	universe.	Men,	animals,	beasts,	birds-everything	is
simultaneously	created,	because	whatever	desires	the	living	entities	had	at	the
last	annihilation	are	again	manifested.	It	is	clearly	stated	here	that	the	living
entities	have	nothing	to	do	with	this	process.	The	state	of	being	in	their	past
life	in	the	past	creation	is	simply	manifested	again,	and	all	this	is	done	simply
by	His	will.	This	is	the	inconceivable	potency	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of
God.	And	after	creating	different	species	of	life,	He	has	no	connection	with
them.	The	creation	takes	place	to	accommodate	the	inclinations	of	the	various
living	entities,	and	so	the	Lord	does	not	become	involved	with	it.
TEXT	9
न
	
च
	
म ा ं
	
त ा ि न
	
क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
ि न ब ᇲ न ि ᇳ त
	
ध न ᇮ ज य
	
।
उ द ा स ी न व द ा स ी न म स ᇧ त ं
	
त े ष ु
	
क म ᆼ स ु
	
॥
९
॥
na	ca	māṁ	tāni	karmāṇi
nibadhnanti	dhanañjaya
udāsīnavad	āsīnam
asaktaṁ	teṣu	karmasu
na—
never;	
ca—
also;	
mām—
Me;	
tāni—
all	those;	
karmāṇi—
activities;
nibadhnanti—
bind;	
dhanañjaya
—O	conquerer	of	riches;	
udāsīnavat—
as
neutral;	
āsīnam—
situated;	
asaktam—
without	attraction;	
teṣu—
in	them;
karmasu—
in	activities.
TRANSLATION
O	Dhanañjaya,	all	this	work	cannot	bind	Me.	I	am	ever	detached,
seated	as	though	neutral.
PURPORTOne	should	not	think,	in	this	connection,	that	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead	has	no	engagement.	In	His	spiritual	world	He	is	always	engaged.	In
the	
Brahma-saṁhitā	
it	is	stated:	"He	is	always	involved	in	His	eternal,
blissful,	spiritual	activities,	but	He	has	nothing	to	do	with	these	material
activities."	Material	activities	are	being	carried	on	by	His	different	potencies.
The	Lord	is	always	neutral	in	the	material	activities	of	the	created	world.	This
neutrality	is	explained	here.	Although	He	has	control	over	every	minute	detail
of	matter,	He	is	sitting	as	if	neutral.	The	example	can	be	given	of	a	high	court
judge	sitting	on	his	bench.	By	his	order	so	many	things	are	happening:
someone	is	being	hanged,	someone	is	being	put	into	jail,	someone	is	awarded
a	huge	amount	of	wealth-but	still	he	is	neutral.	He	has	nothing	to	do	with	all
that	gain	and	loss.	Similarly,	the	Lord	is	always	neutral,	although	He	has	His
hand	in	every	sphere	of	activity.	In	the	
Vedānta-sūtra	
it	is	stated	that	He	is	not
situated	in	the	dualities	of	this	material	world.	He	is	transcendental	to	these
dualities.	Nor	is	He	attached	to	the	creation	and	annihilation	of	this	material
world.	The	living	entities	take	their	different	forms	in	the	various	species	of
life	according	to	their	past	deeds,	and	the	Lord	doesn't	interfere	with	them.
TEXT	10
म य ा ᇲ य ᇤ े ण
	
प ् र क ृ ि त ः
	
स ू य त े
	
स च र ा च र म ्
	
।
ह े त ु न ा न े न
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
ज ग द ् ि व प ि र व त ᆼ त े
	
॥
१ ०
॥
mayādhyakṣeṇa	prakṛtiḥ
sūyate	sa-carācaram
hetunānena	kaunteya
jagad	viparivartate
mayā
—by	Me;	
adhyakṣeṇa—
by	superintendence;	
prakṛtiḥ
—material
nature;	
sūyate
—manifest;	
sa
—with;	
carācaram—
moving	and	nonmoving;
hetunā
—for	this	reason;	
anena
—this;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of	Kuntī;	
jagat
—the
cosmic	manifestation;	
viparivartate—
is	working.
TRANSLATION
This	material	nature	is	working	under	My	direction,	O	son	of	Kuntī,
and	it	is	producing	all	moving	and	unmoving	beings.	By	its	rule	thismanifestation	is	created	and	annihilated	again	and	again.
PURPORT
It	is	clearly	stated	here	that	the	Supreme	Lord,	although	aloof	from	all	the
activities	of	the	material	world,	remains	the	supreme	director.	The	Supreme
Lord	is	the	supreme	will	and	the	background	of	this	material	manifestation,
but	the	management	is	being	conducted	by	material	nature.	Kṛṣṇa	also	states
in	
Bhagavad-gītā	
that	of	all	the	living	entities	in	different	forms	and	species,
"I	am	the	Father."	The	father	gives	seeds	to	the	womb	of	the	mother	for	the
child,	and	similarly	the	Supreme	Lord	by	His	mere	glance	injects	all	the	living
entities	into	the	womb	of	material	nature,	and	they	come	out	in	their	different
forms	and	species,	according	to	their	last	desires	and	activities.	All	these
living	entities,	although	born	under	the	glance	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	still	take
their	different	bodies	according	to	their	past	deeds	and	desires.	So	the	Lord	is
not	directly	attached	to	this	material	creation.	He	simply	glances	over	material
nature;	material	nature	is	thus	activated,	and	everything	is	created
immediately.	Because	He	glances	over	material	nature,	there	is	undoubtedly
activity	on	the	part	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	but	He	has	nothing	to	do	with	the
manifestation	of	the	material	world	directly.	This	example	is	given	in	the
smṛti:	
when	there	is	a	fragrant	flower	before	someone,	the	fragrance	is
touched	by	the	smelling	power	of	the	person,	yet	the	smelling	and	the	flower
are	detached	from	one	another.	There	is	a	similar	connection	between	the
material	world	and	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead;	actually	He	has
nothing	to	do	with	this	material	world,	but	He	creates	by	His	glance	and
ordains.	In	summary,	material	nature,	without	the	superintendence	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	cannot	do	anything.	Yet	the	Supreme
Personality	is	detached	from	all	material	activities.
TEXT	11
अ व ज ा न ि ᇳ त
	
म ा ं
	
म ू ढ ा
	
म ा न ु ष ी ं
	
त न ु म ा ि श ् र त म ्
	
।
प र ं
	
भ ा व म ज ा न ᇳ त ो
	
म म
	
भ ू त म ह े ᇽ व र म ्
	
॥
१ १
॥
avajānanti	māṁ	mūḍhā
mānuṣīṁ	tanum	āśritam
paraṁ	bhāvam	ajānantomama	bhūta-maheśvaram
avajānanti—
deride;	
mām—
Me;	
mūḍhāḥ
—foolish	men;	
mānuṣīm—
in	a
human	form;	
tanum—
body;
	āśritam—
assuming;	
param—
transcendental;
bhāvam—
nature;	
ajānantaḥ—
not	knowing;	
mama
—Mine;	
bhūta—
everything
that	be;	
maheśvaram—
supreme	proprietor.
TRANSLATION
Fools	deride	Me	when	I	descend	in	the	human	form.	They	do	not	know
My	transcendental	nature	and	My	supreme	dominion	over	all	that	be.
PURPORT
From	the	other	explanations	of	the	previous	verses	in	this	chapter,	it	is	clear
that	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	although	appearing	like	a	human
being,	is	not	a	common	man.	The	Personality	of	Godhead,	who	conducts	the
creation,	maintenance	and	annihilation	of	the	complete	cosmic	manifestation,
cannot	be	a	human	being.	Yet	there	are	many	foolish	men	who	consider	Kṛṣṇa
to	be	merely	a	powerful	man	and	nothing	more.	Actually,	He	is	the	original
Supreme	Personality,	as	is	confirmed	in	the	
Brahma-saṁhitā	(iśvaraḥ
paramaḥ	kṛsṇaḥ);	
He	is	the	Supreme	Lord.
There	are	many	
īśvaras,	
controllers,	and	one	appears	greater	than	another.
In	the	ordinary	management	of	affairs	in	the	material	world,	we	find	some
official	or	director,	and	above	him	there	is	a	secretary,	and	above	him	a
minister,	and	above	him	a	president.	Each	of	them	is	a	controller,	but	one	is
controlled	by	another.	In	the	
Brahma-saṁhitā	
it	is	said	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the
supreme	controller;	there	are	many	controllers	undoubtedly	both	in	the
material	and	spiritual	world,	but	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	supreme	controller	
(īśvaraḥ
paramaḥ	kṛṣṇaḥ),	
and	His	body	is	
sac-cid-ānanda,	
non-material.
Material	bodies	cannot	perform	the	wonderful	acts	described	in	previous
verses.	His	body	is	eternal,	blissful	and	full	of	knowledge.	Although	He	is	not
a	common	man,	the	foolish	deride	Him	and	consider	Him	to	be	a	man.	His
body	is	called	here	
mānuṣīm	
because	He	is	acting	just	like	a	man,	a	friend	of
Arjuna's,	a	politician	involved	in	the	Battle	of	Kurukṣetra.	In	so	many	ways
He	is	acting	just	like	an	ordinary	man,	but	actually	His	body	is	
sac-cid-
ānanda-vigraha
–eternal	bliss	and	knowledge	absolute.	This	is	confirmed	inthe	Vedic	language	also	
(sac-cid-ānanda-rūpāya	kṛṣṇāya):
	"I	offer	my
obeisances	unto	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	who	is	the
eternal	blissful	form	of	knowledge."	There	are	other	descriptions	in	the	Vedic
language	also.	
Tam	ekaṁ	govindam:	
"You	are	Govinda,	the	pleasure	of	the
senses	and	the	cows."	
Sac-cid-ānanda-	vigraham:	
"And	Your	form	is
transcendental,	full	of	knowledge,	bliss	and	eternality."
Despite	the	transcendental	qualities	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa's	body,	its	full	bliss	and
knowledge,	there	are	many	so-called	scholars	and	commentators	of
Bhagavad-gītā	
who	deride	Kṛṣṇa	as	an	ordinary	man.	The	scholar	may	be
born	an	extraordinary	man	due	to	his	previous	good	work,	but	this	conception
of	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	is	due	to	a	poor	fund	of	knowledge.	Therefore	he	is	called	
mūḍha,
for	only	foolish	persons	consider	Kṛṣṇa	to	be	an	ordinary	human	being
because	they	do	not	know	the	confidential	activities	of	the	Supreme	Lord	and
His	different	energies.	They	do	not	know	that	Kṛṣṇa's	body	is	a	symbol	of
complete	knowledge	and	bliss,	that	He	is	the	proprietor	of	everything	that	be
and	that	He	can	award	liberation	to	anyone.	Because	they	do	not	know	that
Kṛṣṇa	has	so	many	transcendental	qualifications,	they	deride	Him.
Nor	do	they	know	that	the	appearance	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead	in	this	material	world	is	a	manifestation	of	His	internal	energy.	He	is
the	master	of	the	material	energy.	As	has	been	explained	in	several	places
(mama	māyā	duratyayā),	
He	claims	that	the	material	energy,	although	very
powerful,	is	under	His	control,	and	whoever	surrenders	unto	Him	can	get	out
of	the	control	of	this	material	energy.	If	a	soul	surrendered	to	Kṛṣṇa	can	get
out	of	the	influence	of	material	energy,	then	how	can	the	Supreme	Lord,	who
conducts	the	creation,	maintenance	and	annihilation	of	the	whole	cosmic
nature,	have	a	material	body	like	us?	So	this	conception	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	complete
foolishness.	Foolish	persons,	however,	cannot	conceive	that	the	Personality	of
Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	appearing	just	like	an	ordinary	man,	can	be	the	controller	of
all	the	atoms	and	of	the	gigantic	manifestation	of	the	universal	form.	The
biggest	and	the	minutest	are	beyond	their	conception,	so	they	cannot	imagine
that	a	form	like	that	of	a	human	being	can	simultaneously	control	the	infinite
and	the	minute.	Actually	although	He	is	controlling	the	infinite	and	the	finite,
He	is	apart	from	all	this	manifestation.	It	is	clearly	stated	concerning	His
yogam	aiśvaram,	
His	inconceivable	transcendental	energy,	that	He	can	control
the	infinite	and	the	finite	simultaneously	and	that	He	can	remain	aloof	from
them.	Although	the	foolish	cannot	imagine	how	Kṛṣṇa,	who	appears	just	like	a
human	being,	can	control	the	infinite	and	the	finite,	those	who	are	pure
devotees	accept	this,	for	they	know	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme	Personality	ofGodhead.	Therefore	they	completely	surrender	unto	Him	and	engage	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	devotional	service	of	the	Lord.
There	are	many	controversies	amongst	the	impersonalists	and	the
personalists	about	the	Lord's	appearance	as	a	human	being.	But	if	we	consult
Bhagavad-gītā	
and	
Śrīmad-	Bhāgavatam,	
the	authoritative	texts	for
understanding	the	science	of	Kṛṣṇa,	then	we	can	understand	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	He	is	not	an	ordinary	man,	although	He
appeared	on	this	earth	as	an	ordinary	human.	In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,	
First
Canto,	First	Chapter,	when	the	sages	inquire	about	the	activities	of	Kṛṣṇa,	it	is
stated	that	His	appearance	as	a	man	bewilders	the	foolish.	No	human	being
could	perform	the	wonderful	acts	that	Kṛṣṇa	performed	while	He	was	present
on	this	earth.	When	Kṛṣṇa	appeared	before	His	father	and	mother,	Vasudeva
and	Devakī,	He	appeared	with	four	hands,	but	after	the	prayers	of	the	parents,
He	transformed	Himself	into	an	ordinary	child.	His	appearance	as	an	ordinary
human	being	is	one	of	the	features	of	His	transcendental	body.	In	the	Eleventh
Chapter	of	the	
Gītā	
also	it	is	stated,	
tenaiva	rūpeṇa	
etc.	Arjuna	prayed	to	see
again	that	form	of	four	hands,	and	when	Kṛṣṇa	was	thus	petitioned	by	Arjuna,
He	again	assumed	His	original	form.	All	these	different	features	of	the
Supreme	Lord	are	certainly	not	those	of	an	ordinary	human	being.
Some	of	those	who	deride	Kṛṣṇa,	who	are	infected	with	the	Māyāvādī
philosophy,	quote	the	following	verse	from	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
to	prove
that	Kṛṣṇa	is	just	an	ordinary	man:	
ahaṁ	sarveṣu	bhūteṣu	bhūtātmāvasthitaḥ
sadā:	
"The	Supreme	is	present	in	every	living	entity."	(
Bhāg.	
3.29.21)We
should	better	take	note	of	this	particular	verse	from	the	Vaiṣṇava	
ācāryas	
like
Jīva	Gosvāmī	instead	of	following	the	interpretation	of	unauthorized	persons
who	deride	Kṛṣṇa.	Jīva	Gosvāmī,	commenting	on	this	verse,	says	that	Kṛṣṇa,
in	His	plenary	expansion	as	Paramātmā,	is	situated	in	the	moving	and	the
nonmoving	entities	as	the	Supersoul,	so	any	neophyte	devotee	who	simply
gives	his	attention	to	the	
arca-mūrti,	
the	form	of	the	Supreme	Lord	in	the
temple,	and	does	not	respect	other	living	entities	is	uselessly	worshiping	the
form	of	the	Lord	in	the	temple.	There	are	three	kinds	of	devotees	of	the	Lord,
and	the	neophyte	is	in	the	lowest	stage.	The	neophyte	devotee	gives	more
attention	to	the	Deity	in	the	temple	than	to	other	devotees,	so	Jīva	Gosvāmī
warns	that	this	sort	of	mentality	should	be	corrected.	A	devotee	should	see	that
Kṛṣṇa	is	present	in	everyone's	heart	as	Paramātmā;	therefore	every	body	is	the
embodiment	or	the	temple	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	and	as	such,	as	one	offers
respect	to	the	temple	of	the	Lord,	he	should	similarly	properly	respect	each
and	every	body	in	whom	the	Paramātmā	dwells.	Everyone	should	therefore	begiven	proper	respect	and	should	not	be	neglected.
There	are	also	many	impersonalists	who	deride	temple	worship.	They	say
that	since	God	is	everywhere,	why	should	one	restrict	himself	to	temple
worship?	But	if	God	is	everywhere,	is	He	not	in	the	temple	or	in	the	Deity?
Although	the	personalist	and	the	impersonalist	will	fight	with	one	another
perpetually,	a	perfect	devotee	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	knows	that	although
Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme	Personality,	He	is	all-pervading,	as	is	confirmed	in	the
Brahma-saṁhitā.	
Although	His	personal	abode	is	Goloka	Vṛndāvana	and	He
is	always	staying	there,	still,	by	His	different	manifestations	of	energy	and	by
His	plenary	expansion,	He	is	present	everywhere	in	all	parts	of	the	material
and	spiritual	creation.
TEXT	12
म ो घ ा श ा
	
म ो घ क म ा ᆼ ण ो
	
म ो घ ᇥ ा न ा
	
ि व च े त स ः
	
।
र ा ᇤ स ी म ा स ु र ी ं
	
च ै व
	
प ् र क ृ ि त ं
	
म ो ि ह न ी ं
	
ि श ् र त ा ः
	
॥
१ २
॥
moghāśā	mogha-karmāṇo
mogha-jñānā	vicetasaḥ
rākṣasīm	āsurīṁ	caiva
prakṛtiṁ	mohinīṁ	śritāḥ
moghāśāḥ—
baffled	hope;	
mogha-karmāṇaḥ—
baffled	in	fruitive	activities;
mogha-jñānāḥ—
baffled	in	knowledge;	
vicetasaḥ—
bewildered;	
rākṣasīm—
demonic;	
āsurīm—
atheistic;	
ca—
and;	
eva—
certainly;
	prakṛtim—
nature;
mohinīm
—bewildering;	
śritāḥ—
taking	shelter	of.
TRANSLATION
Those	who	are	thus	bewildered	are	attracted	by	demonic	and	atheistic
views.	In	that	deluded	condition,	their	hopes	for	liberation,	their	fruitive
activities,	and	their	culture	of	knowledge	are	all	defeated.
PURPORT
There	are	many	devotees	who	assume	themselves	to	be	in	Kṛṣṇaconsciousness	and	devotional	service	but	at	heart	do	not	accept	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	as	the	Absolute	Truth.	For	them,	the	fruit	of
devotional	service-going	back	to	Godhead-will	never	be	tasted.	Similarly,
those	who	are	engaged	in	fruitive,	pious	activities	and	who	are	ultimately
hoping	to	be	liberated	from	this	material	entanglement	will	never	be
successful	either	because	they	deride	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
Kṛṣṇa.	In	other	words,	persons	who	mock	Kṛṣṇa	are	to	be	understood	to	be
demonic	or	atheistic.	As	described	in	the	Seventh	Chapter	of	
Bhagavad-gītā,
such	demonic	miscreants	never	surrender	to	Kṛṣṇa.	Therefore	their	mental
speculations	to	arrive	at	the	Absolute	Truth	bring	them	to	the	false	conclusion
that	the	ordinary	living	entity	and	Kṛṣṇa	are	one	and	the	same.	With	such	a
false	conviction,	they	think	that	the	body	of	any	human	being	is	now	simply
covered	by	material	nature	and	that	as	soon	as	one	is	liberated	from	this
material	body	there	is	no	difference	between	God	and	himself.	This	attempt	to
become	one	with	Kṛṣṇa	will	be	baffled	because	of	delusion.	Such	atheistic	and
demoniac	cultivation	of	spiritual	knowledge	is	always	futile.	That	is	the
indication	of	this	verse.	For	such	persons,	cultivation	of	the	knowledge	in	the
Vedic	literature,	like	the	
Vedānta-sūtra	
and	the	
Upaniṣads,	
is	always	baffled.
It	is	a	great	offense,	therefore,	to	consider	Kṛṣṇa,	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead,	to	be	an	ordinary	man.	Those	who	do	so	are	certainly	deluded
because	they	cannot	understand	the	eternal	form	of	Kṛṣṇa.	In	the	
Bṛhad-
vaiṣṇava	mantra	
it	is	clearly	stated	that	one	who	considers	the	body	of	Kṛṣṇa
to	be	material	should	be	driven	out	from	all	rituals	and	activities	of	the	
śruti.
And	if	one	by	chance	sees	his	face,	he	should	at	once	take	bath	in	the	Ganges
to	rid	himself	of	infection.	People	jeer	at	Kṛṣṇa	because	they	are	envious	of
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Their	destiny	is	certainly	to	take	birth
after	birth	in	the	species	of	atheistic	and	demoniac	life.	Perpetually,	their	real
knowledge	will	remain	under	delusion,	and	gradually	they	will	regress	to	the
darkest	region	of	creation.
TEXT	13
म ह ा ᇰ म ा न ᇿ त ु
	
म ा ं
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
द ै व ी ं
	
प ् र क ृ ि त म ा ि श ् र त ा ः
	
।
भ ज ᇳ ᇰ य न ᇳ य म न स ो
	
ᇥ ा ᇰ व ा
	
भ ू त ा ि द म ᇼ य य म ्
	
॥
१ ३
॥
mahātmānas	tu	māṁ	pārtha
daivīṁ	prakṛtim	āśritāḥ
bhajanty	ananya-manasojñātvā	bhūtādim	avyayam
mahātmānaḥ—
the	great	souls;	
tu—
but;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
pārtha
—O	son	of
Pṛthā;	
daivīm—
divine;	
prakṛtim—
nature;	
āśritāḥ—
taken	shelter	of;	
bhajanti
—
render	service;	
ananya-manasaḥ—
without	deviation	of	the	mind;	
jñātvā
—
knowing;	
bhūta
—creation;	
ādim—
original;	
avyayam
—inexhaustible.
TRANSLATION
O	son	of	Pṛthā,	those	who	are	not	deluded,	the	great	souls,	are	under
the	protection	of	the	divine	nature.	They	are	fully	engaged	in	devotional
service	because	they	know	Me	as	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
original	and	inexhaustible.
PURPORT
In	this	verse	the	description	of	
mahātmā	
is	clearly	given.	The	first	sign	of
the	
mahātmā	
is	that	he	is	already	situated	in	the	divine	nature.	He	is	not	under
the	control	of	material	nature.	And	how	is	this	effected?	That	is	explained	in
the	Seventh	Chapter:	one	who	surrenders	unto	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead,	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa,	at	once	becomes	freed	from	the	control	of	material
nature.	That	is	the	qualification.	One	can	become	free	from	the	control	of
material	nature	as	soon	as	he	surrenders	his	soul	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.	That	is	the	preliminary	formula.	Being	marginal	potency,	as	soon	as
the	living	entity	is	freed	from	the	control	of	material	nature,	he	is	put	under
the	guidance	of	the	spiritual	nature.	The	guidance	of	the	spiritual	nature	is
called	
daivīṁ	prakṛtim,	
divine	nature.	So,	when	one	is	promoted	in	that	way-
by	surrendering	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead-one	attains	to	the
stage	of	great	soul,	
mahātmā.
The	
mahātmā	
does	not	divert	his	attention	to	anything	outside	Kṛṣṇa
because	he	knows	perfectly	well	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	original	Supreme	Person,
the	cause	of	all	causes.	There	is	no	doubt	about	it.	Such	a	
mahātmā,
	or	great
soul,	develops	through	association	with	other	
mahātmās,	
pure	devotees.	Pure
devotees	are	not	even	attracted	by	Kṛṣṇa's	other	features,	such	as	the	four-
armed	Mahā-Viṣṇu.	They	are	simply	attracted	by	the	two-	armed	form	of
Kṛṣṇa.	Since	they	are	not	attracted	to	other	features	of	Kṛṣṇa	(what	to	speak	of
the	demigods),	they	are	not	concerned	with	any	form	of	a	demigod	or	of	ahuman	being.	They	only	meditate	upon	Kṛṣṇa	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	They
are	always	engaged	in	the	unswerving	service	of	the	Lord	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.
TEXT	14
स त त ं
	
क ी त ᆼ य ᇳ त ो
	
म ा ं
	
य त ᇳ त ᇽ च
	
द ृ ढ व ् र त ा ः
	
।
न म ᇿ य ᇳ त ᇽ च
	
म ा ं
	
भ ᇧ ᇰ य ा
	
ि न ᇰ य य ु ᇧ त ा
	
उ प ा स त े
	
॥
१ ४
॥
satataṁ	kīrtayanto	māṁ
yatantaś	ca	dṛḍha-vratāḥ
namasyantaś	ca	māṁ	bhaktyā
nitya-yuktā	upāsate
satatam—
always;	
kīrtayantaḥ—
chanting;	
mām—
Me;	
yatantaḥ	ca—
fully
endeavoring	also;	
dṛḍha-vratāḥ—
with	determination;	
namasyantaḥ	ca—
offering	obeisances;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
bhaktyā—
in	devotion;	
nitya-yuktāḥ
—
perpetually	engaged;	
upāsate—
worship.
TRANSLATION
Always	chanting	My	glories,	endeavoring	with	great	determination,
bowing	down	before	Me,	these	great	souls	perpetually	worship	Me	with
devotion.
PURPORT
The	
mahātmā	
cannot	be	manufactured	by	rubber-stamping	an	ordinary	man.
His	symptoms	are	described	here:	a	
mahātmā	
is	always	engaged	in	chanting
the	glories	of	the	Supreme	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	the	Personality	of	Godhead.	He	has	no
other	business.	He	is	always	engaged	in	the	glorification	of	the	Lord.	In	other
words,	he	is	not	an	impersonalist.	When	the	question	of	glorification	is	there,
one	has	to	glorify	the	Supreme	Lord,	praising	His	holy	name,	His	eternal
form,	His	transcendental	qualities	and	His	uncommon	pastimes.	One	has	to
glorify	all	these	things;	therefore	a	
mahātmā	
is	attached	to	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.One	who	is	attached	to	the	impersonal	feature	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	the
brahmajyoti,	
is	not	described	as	
mahātmā	
in	the	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
He	is
described	in	a	different	way	in	the	next	verse.	The	
mahātmā	
is	always	engaged
in	different	activities	of	devotional	service,	as	described	in	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam,	
hearing	and	chanting	about	Viṣṇu,	not	a	demigod	or	human
being.	That	is	devotion:	
śravaṇaṁ	kīrtanaṁ	viṣṇoḥ,	smaraṇam,	
and
remembering	Him.	Such	a	
mahātmā	
has	firm	determination	to	achieve	at	the
ultimate	end	the	association	of	the	Supreme	Lord	in	any	one	of	the	five
transcendental	
rasas.	
To	achieve	that	success,	he	engages	all	activities
—
mental,	bodily	and	vocal,	everything
—
in	the	service	of	the	Supreme	Lord,
Śrī	Kṛṣṇa.	That	is	called	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
In	devotional	service	there	are	certain	activities	which	are	called
determined,	such	as	fasting	on	certain	days,	like	the	eleventh	day	of	the	moon,
Ekādaśī,	
and	on	the	appearance	day	of	the	Lord,	etc.	All	these	rules	and
regulations	are	offered	by	the	great	
ācāryas
	for	those	who	are	actually
interested	in	getting	admission	into	the	association	of	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead	in	the	transcendental	world.	The	
mahātmās
,	great	souls,	strictly
observe	all	these	rules	and	regulations,	and	therefore	they	are	sure	to	achieve
the	desired	result.
As	described	in	the	second	verse	of	this	chapter,	this	devotional	service	is
not	only	easy,	but	it	can	be	performed	in	a	happy	mood.	One	does	not	need	to
undergo	any	severe	penance	and	austerity.	He	can	live	this	life	in	devotional
service,	guided	by	an	expert	spiritual	master,	and	in	any	position,	either	as	a
householder	or	a	
sannyāsī
,	or	a	
brahmacārī
;	in	any	position	and	anywhere	in
the	world,	he	can	perform	this	devotional	service	to	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead	and	thus	become	actually	
mahātmā
,	a	great	soul.
TEXT	15
ᇥ ा न य ᇥ े न
	
च ा ᇴ य ᇳ य े
	
य ज ᇳ त ो
	
म ा म ु प ा स त े
	
।
ए क ᇰ व े न
	
प ृ थ ᇧ ᇰ व े न
	
ब ह ु ध ा
	
ि व ᇽ व त ो म ु ख म ्
	
॥
१ ५
॥
jñāna-yajñena	cāpy	anye
yajanto	mām	upāsate
ekatvena	pṛthaktvena
bahudhā	viśvato-mukhamjñāna-yajñena—
by	cultivation	of	knowledge;	
ca—
also;	
api—
certainly;	
anye
—
others;	
yajantaḥ—
worshiping;	
mām
—Me;	
upāsate—
worship;	
ekatvena	
—in
oneness;	
pṛthaktvena
—in	duality;	
bahudhā—
diversity;	
viśvataḥ-mukham	
—in
the	universal	form.
TRANSLATION
Others,	who	are	engaged	in	the	cultivation	of	knowledge,	worship	the
Supreme	Lord	as	the	one	without	a	second,	diverse	in	many,	and	in	the
universal	form.
PURPORT
This	verse	is	the	summary	of	the	previous	verses.	The	Lord	tells	Arjuna	that
those	who	are	purely	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	do	not	know	anything	other
than	Kṛṣṇa	are	called	
mahātmā;	
yet	there	are	other	persons	who	are	not
exactly	in	the	position	of	
mahātmā	
but	who	worship	Kṛṣṇa	also,	in	different
ways.	Some	of	them	are	already	described	as	the	distressed,	the	financially
destitute,	the	inquisitive,	and	those	who	are	engaged	in	the	cultivation	of
knowledge.	But	there	are	others	who	are	still	lower,	and	these	are	divided	into
three:	1)	He	who	worships	himself	as	one	with	the	Supreme	Lord,	2)	He	who
concocts	some	form	of	the	Supreme	Lord	and	worships	that,	and	3)	He	who
accepts	the	universal	form,	the	
viśvarūpa	
of	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead,	and	worships	that.	Out	of	the	above	three,	the	lowest,	those	who
worship	themselves	as	the	Supreme	Lord,	thinking	themselves	to	be	monists,
are	most	predominant.	Such	people	think	themselves	to	be	the	Supreme	Lord,
and	in	this	mentality	they	worship	themselves.	This	is	also	a	type	of	God
worship,	for	they	can	understand	that	they	are	not	the	material	body	but	are
actually	spiritual	soul;	at	least,	such	a	sense	is	prominent.	Generally	the
impersonalists	worship	the	Supreme	Lord	in	this	way.	The	second	class
includes	the	worshipers	of	the	demigods,	those	who	by	imagination	consider
any	form	to	be	the	form	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	And	the	third	class	includes
those	who	cannot	conceive	of	anything	beyond	the	manifestation	of	this
material	universe.	They	consider	the	universe	to	be	the	supreme	organism	or
entity	and	worship	that.	The	universe	is	also	a	form	of	the	Lord.
TEXT	16अ ह ं
	
क ् र त ु र ह ं
	
य ᇥ ः
	
ᇿ व ध ा ह म ह म ौ ष ध म ्
	
।
म ᇳ त ् र ो ऽ ह म ह म े व ा ᇬ य म ह म ि ᇩ न र ह ं
	
ह ु त म ्
	
॥
१ ६
॥
ahaṁ	kratur	ahaṁ	yajñaḥ
svadhāham	aham	auṣadham
mantro	'ham	aham	evājyam
aham	agnir	ahaṁ	hutam
aham
—I;	
kratuḥ
—ritual;	
aham
—I;	
yajñaḥ
—sacrifice;	
svadhā
—oblation;
aham
—I	;	
aham
—I;	
auṣadham
—healing	herb	;	
mantraḥ
—transcendental
chant;	
aham
—I;	
aham
—I;	
eva
—certainly;	
ajyam
—melted	butter;	
aham
—I;
agniḥ
—	fire;	
aham
—I;	
hutam
—offering.
TRANSLATION
But	it	is	I	who	am	the	ritual,	I	the	sacrifice,	the	offering	to	the
ancestors,	the	healing	herb,	the	transcendental	chant.	I	am	the	butter	and
the	fire	and	the	offering.
PURPORT
The	sacrifice	known	as	
jyotiṣṭoma	
is	also	Kṛṣṇa,	and	He	is	also	the	
mahā-
yajña	
The	oblations	offered	to	the	Pitṛloka	or	the	sacrifice	performed	to	please
the	Pitṛloka,	considered	as	a	kind	of	drug	in	the	form	of	clarified	butter,	is	also
Kṛṣṇa.	The	
mantras
	chanted	in	this	connection	are	also	Kṛṣṇa.	And	many
other	commodities	made	with	milk	products	for	offering	in	the	sacrifices	are
also	Kṛṣṇa.	The	fire	is	also	Kṛṣṇa	because	fire	is	one	of	the	five	material
elements	and	is	therefore	claimed	as	the	separated	energy	of	Kṛṣṇa.	In	other
words,	the	Vedic	sacrifices	recommended	in	the	
karma-kāṇḍa	
division	of	the
Vedas	
are	in	total	also	Kṛṣṇa.	Or,	in	other	words,	those	who	are	engaged	in
rendering	devotional	service	unto	Kṛṣṇa	are	to	be	understood	to	have
performed	all	the	sacrifices	recommended	in	the	
Vedas.
TEXT	17
ि प त ा ह म ᇿ य
	
ज ग त ो
	
म ा त ा
	
ध ा त ा
	
ि प त ा म ह ः
	
।व े ሱ ं
	
प ि व त ् र म ो ं क ा र
	
ऋ क ्
	
स ा म
	
य ज ु र े व
	
च
	
॥
१ ७
॥
pitāham	asya	jagato
mātā	dhātā	pitāmahaḥ
vedyaṁ	pavitram	oṁkāra
ṛk	sāma	yajur	eva	ca
pitā—
father;	
aham—
I;
	asya—
of	this;	
jagataḥ—
of	the	universe;	
mātā—
mother;	
dhātā—
supporter;	
pitāmahaḥ—
grandfather;	
vedyam—
what	is	to	be
known;	
pavitram—
that	which	purifies;	
omkāraḥ—
the	syllable	
om;	ṛk—
the	
Ṛg-
veda;	sāma—
the	
Sāma-veda;	yajuḥ—
the	
Yajur-veda;	eva—
certainly;	
ca—
and.
TRANSLATION
I	am	the	father	of	this	universe,	the	mother,	the	support,	and	the
grandsire.	I	am	the	object	of	knowledge,	the	purifier	and	the	syllable	om.
I	am	also	the	Ṛk,	the	Sāma,	and	the	Yajur	[Vedas].
PURPORT
The	entire	cosmic	manifestations,	moving	and	nonmoving,	are	manifested
by	different	activities	of	Kṛṣṇa's	energy.	In	the	material	existence	we	create
different	relationships	with	different	living	entities	who	are	nothing	but
Kṛṣṇa's	marginal	energy,	but	under	the	creation	of	
prakṛti	
some	of	them
appear	as	our	father,	mother,	grandfather,	creator,	etc.,	but	actually	they	are
parts	and	parcels	of	Kṛṣṇa.	As	such,	these	living	entities	who	appear	to	be	our
father,	mother,	etc.,	are	nothing	but	Kṛṣṇa.	In	this	verse	the	word	
dhātā	
means
creator.	Not	only	are	our	father	and	mother	parts	and	parcels	of	Kṛṣṇa,	but
their	creator,	grandmother,	and	grandfather,	etc.,	are	also	Kṛṣṇa.	Actually	any
living	entity,	being	part	and	parcel	of	Kṛṣṇa,	is	Kṛṣṇa.	All	the	
Vedas,	
therefore,
aim	only	toward	Kṛṣṇa.	Whatever	we	want	to	know	through	the	
Vedas	
is	but	a
progressive	step	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa.	That	subject	matter	which	helps	us
purify	our	constitutional	position	is	especially	Kṛṣṇa.	Similarly,	the	living
entity	who	is	inquisitive	to	understand	all	Vedic	principles	is	also	part	and
parcel	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	as	such	is	also	Kṛṣṇa.	In	all	the	Vedic	
mantras	
the	word
om
,	called	
praṇava,	
is	a	transcendental	sound	vibration	and	is	also	Kṛṣṇa.	Andbecause	in	all	the	hymns	of	the	four	
Vedas,	Sāma,	Yajur,	Ṛg	
and	
Atharva
,	the
praṇava
	or	
omkāra	
is	very	prominent,	it	is	understood	to	be	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	18
ग ि त भ ᆼ त ा ᆼ
	
प ् र भ ु ः
	
स ा ᇤ ी
	
ि न व ा स ः
	
श र ण ं
	
स ु ᇦ त ्
	
।
प ् र भ व ः
	
प ् र ल य ः
	
ᇿ थ ा न ं
	
ि न ध ा न ं
	
ब ी ज म ᇼ य य म ्
	
॥
१ ८
॥
gatir	bhartā	prabhuḥ	sākṣī
nivāsaḥ	śaraṇaṁ	suhṛt
prabhavaḥ	pralayaḥ	sthānaṁ
nidhānaṁ	bījam	avyayam
gatiḥ—
goal;	
bhartā—
sustainer;	
prabhuḥ—
Lord;	
sākṣī—
witness;	
nivāsaḥ—
abode;	
śaraṇam—
refuge;	
suhṛt—
most	intimate	friend;	
prabhavaḥ
—creation;
pralayaḥ—
dissolution;	
sthānam
—ground;	
nidhānam
—resting	place;	
bījam—
seed;	
avyayam
—imperishable.
TRANSLATION
I	am	the	goal,	the	sustainer,	the	master,	the	witness,	the	abode,	the
refuge	and	the	most	dear	friend.	I	am	the	creation	and	the	annihilation,
the	basis	of	everything,	the	resting	place	and	the	eternal	seed.
PURPORT
Gati	
means	the	destination	where	we	want	to	go.	But	the	ultimate	goal	is
Kṛṣṇa,	although	people	do	not	know	it.	One	who	does	not	know	Kṛṣṇa	is
misled,	and	his	so-called	progressive	march	is	either	partial	or	hallucinatory.
There	are	many	who	make	as	their	destination	different	demigods,	and	by
rigid	performance	of	the	strict	respective	methods	they	reach	different	planets
known	as	Candraloka,	Sūryaloka,	Indraloka,	Maharloka,	etc.	But	all	such
lokas	
or	planets,	being	creations	of	Kṛṣṇa,	are	simultaneously	Kṛṣṇa	and	not
Kṛṣṇa.	Actually	such	planets,	being	the	manifestations	of	Kṛṣṇa's	energy,	are
also	Kṛṣṇa,	but	actually	they	only	serve	as	a	step	forward	for	realization	ofKṛṣṇa.	To	approach	the	different	energies	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	to	approach	Kṛṣṇa
indirectly.	One	should	directly	approach	Kṛṣṇa,	for	that	will	save	time	and
energy.	For	example,	if	there	is	a	possibility	of	going	to	the	top	of	a	building
by	the	help	of	an	elevator,	why	should	one	go	by	the	staircase,	step	by	step?
Everything	is	resting	on	Kṛṣṇa's	energy;	therefore	without	Kṛṣṇa's	shelter
nothing	can	exist.	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	supreme	ruler	because	everything	belongs	to
Him	and	everything	exists	on	His	energy.	Kṛṣṇa,	being	situated	in	everyone's
heart,	is	the	supreme	witness.	The	residences,	countries	or	planets	on	which
we	live	are	also	Kṛṣṇa.	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	ultimate	goal	of	shelter,	and	as	such	one
should	take	shelter	of	Kṛṣṇa	either	for	protection	or	for	annihilation	of	his
distressed	condition.	And	whenever	we	have	to	take	protection,	we	should
know	that	our	protection	must	be	a	living	force.	Thus	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	supreme
living	entity.	Since	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	source	of	our	generation,	or	the	supreme
father,	no	one	can	be	a	better	friend	than	Kṛṣṇa,	nor	can	anyone	be	a	better
well-wisher.	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	original	source	of	creation	and	the	ultimate	rest	after
annihilation.	Kṛṣṇa	is	therefore	the	eternal	cause	of	all	causes.
TEXT	19
त प ा ᇸ य ह म ह ं
	
व ष ᆾ
	
ि न ग ृ ቈ ा ᇸ य ु ᇰ स ृ ज ा ि म
	
च
	
।
अ म ृ त ं
	
च ै व
	
म ृ ᇰ य ु ᇽ च
	
स द स ᇫ च ा ह म ज ु ᆼ न
	
॥
१ ९
॥
tapāmy	aham	ahaṁ	varṣaṁ
nigṛhṇāmy	utsṛjāmi	ca
amṛtaṁ	caiva	mṛtyuś	ca
sad	asac	cāham	arjuna
tapāmi—
give	heat;	
aham—
I;
	aham—
I;
	varṣam—
rain;	
nigṛhṇāmi—
withold;
utsṛjāmi—
send	forth;	
ca—
and;	
amṛtam—
immortality;	
ca—
and;	
eva
—
certainly;
	mṛtyuḥ—
death;	
ca—
and;	
sat—
being;	
asat—
nonbeing;	
ca—
and;
aham—
I;
	arjuna
—O	Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
O	Arjuna,	I	control	heat,	the	rain	and	the	drought.	I	am	immortality,
and	I	am	also	death	personified.	Both	being	and	nonbeing	are	in	Me.PURPORT
Kṛṣṇa,	by	His	different	energies,	diffuses	heat	and	light	through	the	agency
of	electricity	and	the	sun.	During	summer	season	it	is	Kṛṣṇa	who	checks	rain
from	falling	from	the	sky,	and	then,	during	the	rainy	season,	He	gives
unceasing	torrents	of	rain.	The	energy	which	sustains	us	by	prolonging	the
duration	of	our	life	is	Kṛṣṇa,	and	Kṛṣṇa	meets	us	at	the	end	as	death.	By
analyzing	all	these	different	energies	of	Kṛṣṇa,	one	can	acertain	that	for	Kṛṣṇa
there	is	no	distinction	between	matter	and	spirit,	or,	in	other	words,	He	is	both
matter	and	spirit.	In	the	advanced	stage	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	one	does	not
therefore	make	such	distinctions.	He	sees	Kṛṣṇa	only	in	everything.
Since	Kṛṣṇa	is	both	matter	and	spirit,	the	gigantic	universal	form
comprising	all	material	manifestations	is	also	Kṛṣṇa,	and	His	pastimes	in
Vṛndāvana	as	two-handed	Śyāmasundara,	playing	on	a	flute,	are	those	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.
TEXT	20
त ् र ै ि व ሱ ा
	
म ा ं
	
स ो म प ा ः
	
प ू त प ा प ा
	
य ᇥ ै ि र ᇾ ट ् व ा
	
ᇿ व ग ᆼ ि त ं
	
प ् र ा थ ᆼ य ᇳ त े
	
।
त े
	
प ु ᇯ य म ा स ा ሱ
	
स ु र े ᇳ द ् र ल ो क
-	
म ᇽ न ि ᇳ त
	
ि द ᇼ य ा ि ᇳ द ि व
	
द े व भ ो ग ा न ्
	
॥
२ ०
॥
trai-vidyā	māṁ	soma-pāḥ	pūta-pāpā
yajñair	iṣṭvā	svargatiṁ	prārthayante
te	puṇyam	āsādya	surendra-lokam
aśnanti	divyān	divi	deva-bhogān
trai-vidyāḥ—
the	knowers	of	the	three	
Vedas;	mām—
unto	Me;	
soma-pāḥ—
drinkers	of	
soma	
juice;	
pūta
—purified;	
pāpāḥ
—sins;	
yajñaiḥ
—with
sacrifices;	
iṣṭvā
—after	worshiping;	
svargatim—
passage	to	heaven;
prārthayante—
pray;	
te—
they;	
puṇyam
—virtue;	
āsādya—
enjoying;	
surendra
—
of	Indra;	
lokam—	
world;	
aśnanti—
enjoy;	
divyān—
celestial;	
divi—
in	heaven;
deva-bhogān—	
pleasures	of	the	gods.TRANSLATION
Those	who	study	the	Vedas	and	drink	the	soma	juice,	seeking	the
heavenly	planets,	worship	Me	indirectly.	They	take	birth	on	the	planet	of
Indra,	where	they	enjoy	godly	delights.
PURPORT
The	word	
trai-vidyāḥ	
refers	to	the	three	
Vedas,	Sāma,	Yajur	
and	
Ṛg
.	A
brāhmaṇa	
who	has	studied	these	three	
Vedas	
is	called	a	
tri-vedī.	
Anyone	who
is	very	much	attached	to	knowledge	derived	from	these	three	
Vedas	
is
respected	in	society.	Unfortunately,	there	are	many	great	scholars	of	the	
Vedas
who	do	not	know	the	ultimate	purport	of	studying	them.	Therefore	Kṛṣṇa
herein	declares	Himself	to	be	the	ultimate	goal	for	the	
tri-vedīs.	
Actual	
tri-
vedīs	
take	shelter	under	the	lotus	feet	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	engage	in	pure	devotional
service	to	satisfy	the	Lord.	Devotional	service	begins	with	the	chanting	of	the
Hare	Kṛṣṇa	
mantra	
and	side	by	side	trying	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa	in	truth.
Unfortunately	those	who	are	simply	official	students	of	the	
Vedas	
become
more	interested	in	offering	sacrifices	to	the	different	demigods	like	Indra,
Candra,	etc.	By	such	endeavor,	the	worshipers	of	different	demigods	are
certainly	purified	of	the	contamination	of	the	lower	qualities	of	nature	and	are
thereby	elevated	to	the	higher	planetary	system	or	heavenly	planets	known	as
Maharloka,	Janaloka,	Tapoloka,	etc.	Once	situated	on	those	higher	planetary
systems,	one	can	satisfy	his	senses	hundreds	of	thousands	of	times	better	than
on	this	planet.
TEXT	21
त े
	
त ं
	
भ ु ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
ᇿ व ग ᆼ ल ो क ं
	
ि व श ा ल ं
	
ᇤ ी ण े
	
प ु ᇯ य े
	
म ᇰ य ᆼ ल ो क ं
	
ि व श ि ᇳ त
	
।
ए व ं
	
त ् र य ी ध म ᆼ म न ु प ् र प ᇳ न ा
	
ग त ा ग त ं
	
क ा म क ा म ा
	
ल भ ᇳ त े
	
॥
२ १
॥
te	taṁ	bhuktvā	svarga-lokaṁ	viśālaṁ
kṣīṇe	puṇye	martya-lokaṁ	viśantievaṁ	trayī-dharmam	anuprapannā
gatāgataṁ	kāma-kāmā	labhante
te
—they;	
tam—
that;	
bhuktvā—
enjoying;	
svarga-lokam—
heaven;	
viśālam—
vast;	
kṣīṇe—
being	exhausted;	
puṇye
—merits;	
martya-lokam—
mortal	earth;
viśanti—
fall	down;	
evam
—thus;	
trayī
—three	
Vedas
;	
dharmam—
doctrines;
anuprapannāḥ—
following;	
gata-agatam
—death	and	birth;	
kāma-kāmāḥ—
desiring	sense	enjoyments;	
labhante—
attain.
TRANSLATION
When	they	have	thus	enjoyed	heavenly	sense	pleasure,	they	return	to
this	mortal	planet	again.	Thus,	through	the	Vedic	principles,	they	achieve
only	flickering	happiness.
PURPORT
One	who	is	promoted	to	those	higher	planetary	systems	enjoys	a	longer
duration	of	life	and	better	facilities	for	sense	enjoyment,	yet	one	is	not	allowed
to	stay	there	forever.	One	is	again	sent	back	to	this	earthly	planet	upon
finishing	the	resultant	fruits	of	pious	activities.	He	who	has	not	attained
perfection	of	knowledge,	as	indicated	in	the	
Vedānta-sūtra	(janmādy	asya
yataḥ),	
or,	in	other	words,	he	who	fails	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa,	the	cause	of	all
causes,	becomes	baffled	in	achieving	the	ultimate	goal	of	life	and	is	thus
subjected	to	the	routine	of	being	promoted	to	the	higher	planets	and	then	again
coming	down,	as	if	situated	on	a	ferris	wheel	which	sometimes	goes	up	and
sometimes	comes	down.	The	purport	is	that	instead	of	being	elevated	to	the
spiritual	world	where	there	is	no	longer	any	possibility	of	coming	down,	one
simply	revolves	in	the	cycle	of	birth	and	death	on	higher	and	lower	planetary
systems.	One	should	better	take	to	the	spiritual	world	to	enjoy	eternal	life	full
of	bliss	and	knowledge	and	never	return	to	this	miserable	material	existence.
TEXT	22
अ न ᇳ य ा ि ᇽ च ᇳ त य ᇳ त ो
	
म ा ं
	
य े
	
ज न ा ः
	
प य ु ᆼ प ा स त े
	
।
त े ष ा ं
	
ि न ᇰ य ा ि भ य ु ᇧ त ा न ा ं
	
य ो ग ᇤ े म ं
	
व ह ा ᇸ य ह म ्
	
॥
२ २
॥ananyāś	cintayanto	māṁ
ye	janāḥ	paryupāsate
teṣāṁ	nityābhiyuktānāṁ
yoga-kṣemaṁ	vahāmy	aham
ananyāḥ
—no	other;	
cintayantaḥ
—concentrating;	
mām
—unto	Me;	
ye
—
who;	
janāḥ
—persons;	
paryupāsate
—properly	worship;	
teṣām
—their;	
nitya
—
always	
abhiyuktānām—
fixed	in	devotion;	
yoga-kṣemam
—requirements;
vahāmi
—	carry;	
aham
—I.
TRANSLATION
But	those	who	worship	Me	with	devotion,	meditating	on	My
transcendental	form-to	them	I	carry	what	they	lack	and	preserve	what
they	have.
PURPORT
One	who	is	unable	to	live	for	a	moment	without	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness
cannot	but	think	of	Kṛṣṇa	twenty-four	hours,	being	engaged	in	devotional
service	by	hearing,	chanting,	remembering,	offering	prayers,	worshiping,
serving	the	lotus	feet	of	the	Lord,	rendering	other	services,	cultivating
friendship	and	surrendering	fully	to	the	Lord.	Such	activities	are	all	auspicious
and	full	of	spiritual	potencies;	indeed,	they	make	the	devotee	perfect	in	self-
realization.	Then	his	only	desire	is	to	achieve	the	association	of	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.	This	is	called	
yoga
.	By	the	mercy	of	the	Lord,	such	a
devotee	never	comes	back	to	this	material	condition	of	life.	
Kṣema
	refers	to
the	merciful	protection	of	the	Lord.	The	Lord	helps	the	devotee	to	achieve
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	by	
yoga
,	and	when	he	becomes	fully	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	the
Lord	protects	him	from	falling	down	to	a	miserable	conditioned	life.
TEXT	23
य े ऽ ᇴ य ᇳ य द े व त ा भ ᇧ त ा
	
य ज ᇳ त े
	
श ् र ሬ य ा ि ᇳ व त ा ः
	
।
त े ऽ ि प
	
म ा म े व
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
य ज ᇳ ᇰ य ि व ि ध प ू व ᆼ क म ्
	
॥
२ ३
॥ye	'py	anya-devatā-bhaktā
yajante	śraddhayānvitāḥ
te	'pi	mām	eva	kaunteya
yajanty	avidhi-pūrvakam
ye—
those;	
api—
also;	
anya—
other;	
devatā—
demigods;	
bhaktāḥ—
devotees;
yajante—
worship;
	śraddhaya-anvitāḥ—
with	faith;	
te
—they;	
api—
also;	
mām
—	Me;	
eva
—even;	
kaunteya-O	
son	of	Kuntī;	
yajanti—
sacrifice;	
avidhi-
pūrvakam—
in	a	wrong	way.
TRANSLATION
Whatever	a	man	may	sacrifice	to	other	gods,	O	son	of	Kuntī,	is	really
meant	for	Me	alone,	but	it	is	offered	without	true	understanding.
PURPORT
"Persons	who	are	engaged	in	the	worship	of	demigods	are	not	very
intelligent,	although	such	worship	is	done	to	Me	indirectly,"	Kṛṣṇa	says.	For
example,	when	a	man	pours	water	on	the	leaves	and	branches	of	a	tree	without
pouring	water	on	the	root,	he	does	so	without	sufficient	knowledge	or	without
observing	regulative	principles.	Similarly,	the	process	of	rendering	service	to
different	parts	of	the	body	is	to	supply	food	to	the	stomach.	The	demigods	are,
so	to	speak,	different	officers	and	directors	in	the	government	of	the	Supreme
Lord.	One	has	to	follow	the	laws	made	by	the	government,	not	by	the	officers
or	directors.	Similarly,	everyone	is	to	offer	his	worship	to	the	Supreme	Lord
only.	That	will	automatically	satisfy	the	different	officers	and	directors	of	the
Lord.	The	officers	and	directors	are	engaged	as	representatives	of	the
government,	and	to	offer	some	bribe	to	the	officers	and	directors	is	illegal.
This	is	stated	here	as	
avidhi-pūrvakam.	
In	other	words,	Kṛṣṇa	does	not
approve	the	unnecessary	worship	of	the	demigods.
TEXT	24
अ ह ं
	
ि ह
	
स व ᆼ य ᇥ ा न ा ं
	
भ ो ᇧ त ा
	
च
	
प ् र भ ु र े व
	
च
	
।
न
	
त ु
	
म ा म ि भ ज ा न ि ᇳ त
	
त ᇰ ᇰ व े न ा त ᇽ ᇫ य व ि ᇳ त
	
त े
	
॥
२ ४
॥ahaṁ	hi	sarva-yajñānāṁ
bhoktā	ca	prabhur	eva	ca
na	tu	mām	abhijānanti
tattvenātaś	cyavanti	te
aham—
I;
	hi—
surely;	
sarva—
of	all;	
yajñānām
—sacrifices;	
bhoktā—
enjoyer;
ca—
and;	
prabhuḥ—
Lord;	
eva—
also;	
ca—
and;	
na—
not;	
tu
—but;	
mām—
Me;
abhijānanti—
know;	
tattvena—
in	reality;	
ataḥ—
therefore;	
cyavanti—
fall
down;	
te—
they.
TRANSLATION
I	am	the	only	enjoyer	and	the	only	object	of	sacrifice.	Those	who	do	not
recognize	My	true	transcendental	nature	fall	down.
PURPORT
Here	it	is	clearly	stated	that	there	are	many	types	of	
yajña	
performances
recommended	in	the	Vedic	literatures,	but	actually	all	of	them	are	meant	for
satisfying	the	Supreme	Lord.	
Yajña	
means	Viṣṇu.	In	the	Second	Chapter	of
Bhagavad-gītā	
it	is	clearly	stated	that	one	should	only	work	for	satisfying
Yajña	
or	Viṣṇu.	The	perfectional	form	of	human	civilization,	known	as
varṇāśrama-	dharma,	
is	specifically	meant	for	satisfying	Viṣṇu.	Therefore,
Kṛṣṇa	says	in	this	verse,	"I	am	the	enjoyer	of	all	sacrifices	because	I	am	the
supreme	master."	However,	less	intelligent	persons,	without	knowing	this	fact,
worship	demigods	for	temporary	benefit.	Therefore	they	fall	down	to	material
existence	and	do	not	achieve	the	desired	goal	of	life.	If,	however,	anyone	has
any	material	desire	to	be	fulfilled,	he	had	better	pray	for	it	to	the	Supreme
Lord	(although	that	is	not	pure	devotion),	and	he	will	thus	achieve	the	desired
result.
TEXT	25
य ा ि ᇳ त
	
द े व व ् र त ा
	
द े व ा ि ᇳ प त ॄ ᇳ य ा ि ᇳ त
	
ि प त ृ व ् र त ा ः
	
।
भ ू त ा ि न
	
य ा ि ᇳ त
	
भ ू त े ᇬ य ा
	
य ा ि ᇳ त
	
म ሱ ा ि ज न ो ऽ ि प
	
म ा म ्
	
॥
२ ५
॥yānti	deva-vratā	devān
pitṝn	yānti	pitṛ-vratāḥ
bhūtāni	yānti	bhūtejyā
yānti	mad-yājino	'pi	mām
yānti—
achieve;	
deva-vratāḥ—
worshipers	of	demigods;	
devān—
to
demigods;	
pitṝn—
to	ancestors;	
yānti—
go;	
pitṛ-vratāḥ—
worshipers	of
ancestors;	
bhūtāni—
to	ghosts	and	spirits;	
yānti—
go;	
bhūtejyāḥ—
worshipers	of
ghosts	and	spirits;	
yānti—
go;
	mat—
My;
	yājinaḥ—
devotees;	
api—
also;	
mām
—
unto	Me.
TRANSLATION
Those	who	worship	the	demigods	will	take	birth	among	the	demigods;
those	who	worship	ghosts	and	spirits	will	take	birth	among	such	beings;
those	who	worship	ancestors	go	to	the	ancestors;	and	those	who	worship
Me	will	live	with	Me.
PURPORT
If	anyone	has	any	desire	to	go	to	the	moon,	the	sun,	or	any	other	planet,	one
can	attain	the	desired	destination	by	following	specific	Vedic	principles
recommended	for	that	purpose.	These	are	vividly	described	in	the	fruitive
activities	portion	of	the	
Vedas,	
technically	known	as	
darśa-paurṇamāsī,	
which
recommends	a	specific	worship	of	demigods	situated	on	different	heavenly
planets.	Similarly,	one	can	attain	the	
pitā	
planets	by	performing	a	specific
yajña.	
Similarly,	one	can	go	to	many	ghostly	planets	and	become	a	
yakṣa,
rakṣa	
or	
piśāca.	Piśāca	
worship	is	called	"black	arts"	or	"black	magic."	There
are	many	men	who	practice	this	black	art,	and	they	think	that	it	is	spiritualism,
but	such	activities	are	completely	materialistic.	Similarly,	a	pure	devotee,	who
worships	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	only,	achieves	the	planets	of
Vaikuṇṭha	and	Kṛṣṇaloka	without	a	doubt.	It	is	very	easy	to	understand
through	this	important	verse	that	if	by	simply	worshiping	the	demigods	one
can	achieve	the	heavenly	planets,	or	by	worshiping	the	
pitā	
achieve	the	
pitā
planets,	or	by	practicing	the	black	arts	achieve	the	ghostly	planets,	why	can
the	pure	devotee	not	achieve	the	planet	of	Kṛṣṇa	or	Viṣṇu?	Unfortunately
many	people	have	no	information	of	these	sublime	planets	where	Kṛṣṇa	andViṣṇu	live,	and	because	they	do	not	know	of	them	they	fall	down.	Even	the
impersonalists	fall	down	from	the	
brahmajyoti.	
This	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness
movement	is	therefore	distributing	sublime	information	to	the	entire	human
society	to	the	effect	that	by	simply	chanting	the	Hare	Kṛṣṇa	
mantra	
one	can
become	perfect	in	this	life	and	go	back	home,	back	to	Godhead.
TEXT	26
प त ् र ं
	
प ु ᇾ प ं
	
फ ल ं
	
त ो प ं
	
य ो
	
म े
	
भ ᇧ ᇰ य ा
	
प ् र य ᇫ च ि त
	
।
त द ह ं
	
भ ᇧ त य ु प ᇦ त म श ् र ा ि म
	
प ् र य त ा ᇰ म न ः
	
॥
२ ६
॥
patraṁ	puṣpaṁ	phalaṁ	to	yaṁ
yo	me	bhaktyā	prayacchati
tad	ahaṁ	bhakty-upahṛtam
aśnāmi	prayatātmanaḥ
patram—
a	leaf;	
puṣpam—
a	flower;	
phalam—
a	fruit;	
toyam—
water;	
yaḥ
—
whoever;	
me—
unto	Me;	
bhaktyā—
with	devotion;	
prayacchati—
offers;	
tat
—
that;	
aham—
I;
	bhakti-upahṛtam—
offered	in	devotion;	
aśnāmi—
accept;
prayata-ātmanaḥ—
of	one	in	pure	consciousness.
TRANSLATION
If	one	offers	Me	with	love	and	devotion	a	leaf,	a	flower,	fruit	or	water,	I
will	accept	it.
PURPORT
Here	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	having	established	that	He	is	the	only	enjoyer,	the
primeval	Lord,	and	the	real	object	of	all	sacrificial	offerings,	reveals	what
types	of	sacrifices	He	desires	to	be	offered.	If	one	wishes	to	engage	in
devotional	service	to	the	Supreme	in	order	to	be	purified	and	to	reach	the	goal
of	life-the	transcendental	loving	service	of	God-then	he	should	find	out	what
the	Lord	desires	of	him.	One	who	loves	Kṛṣṇa	will	give	Him	whatever	He
wants,	and	he	avoids	offering	anything	which	is	undesirable	or	unasked	for.
Thus,	meat,	fish	and	eggs	should	not	be	offered	to	Kṛṣṇa.	If	He	desired	suchthings	as	offerings,	He	would	have	said	so.	Instead	He	clearly	requests	that	a
leaf,	fruit,	flowers	and	water	be	given	to	Him,	and	He	says	of	this	offering,	"I
will	accept	it."	Therefore,	we	should	understand	that	He	will	not	accept	meat,
fish	and	eggs.	Vegetables,	grains,	fruits,	milk	and	water	are	the	proper	foods
for	human	beings	and	are	prescribed	by	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	Himself.	Whatever	else
we	eat	cannot	be	offered	to	Him,	since	He	will	not	accept	it.	Thus	we	cannot
be	acting	on	the	level	of	loving	devotion	if	we	offer	such	foods.
In	the	Third	Chapter,	verse	thirteen,	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	explains	that	only	the
remains	of	sacrifice	are	purified	and	fit	for	consumption	by	those	who	are
seeking	advancement	in	life	and	release	from	the	clutches	of	the	material
entanglement.	Those	who	do	not	make	an	offering	of	their	food,	He	says	in	the
same	verse,	are	said	to	be	eating	only	sin.	In	other	words,	their	every	mouthful
is	simply	deepening	their	involvement	in	the	complexities	of	material	nature.
But	preparing	nice,	simple	vegetable	dishes,	offering	them	before	the	picture
or	Deity	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	and	bowing	down	and	praying	for	Him	to	accept	such
a	humble	offering,	enable	one	to	advance	steadily	in	life,	to	purify	the	body,
and	to	create	fine	brain	tissues	which	will	lead	to	clear	thinking.	Above	all,	the
offering	should	be	made	with	an	attitude	of	love.	Kṛṣṇa	has	no	need	of	food,
since	He	already	possesses	everything	that	be,	yet	He	will	accept	the	offering
of	one	who	desires	to	please	Him	in	that	way.	The	important	element,	in
preparation,	in	serving	and	in	offering,	is	to	act	with	love	for	Kṛṣṇa.
The	impersonalist	philosophers,	who	wish	to	maintain	that	the	Absolute
Truth	is	without	senses,	cannot	comprehend	this	verse	of	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
To
them,	it	is	either	a	metaphor	or	proof	of	the	mundane	character	of	Kṛṣṇa,	the
speaker	of	the	
Gītā
.	But,	in	actuality,	Kṛṣṇa,	the	Supreme	Godhead,	has
senses,	and	it	is	stated	that	His	senses	are	interchangeable;	in	other	words,	one
sense	can	perform	the	function	of	any	other.	This	is	what	it	means	to	say	that
Kṛṣṇa	is	absolute.	Lacking	senses,	He	could	hardly	be	considered	full	in	all
opulences.	In	the	Seventh	Chapter,	Kṛṣṇa	has	explained	that	He	impregnates
the	living	entities	into	material	nature.	This	is	done	by	His	looking	upon
material	nature.	And	so	in	this	instance,	Kṛṣṇa's	hearing	the	devotee's	words	of
love	in	offering	foodstuffs	is	
wholly	
identical	with	His	eating	and	actually
tasting.	This	point	should	be	emphasized:	because	of	His	absolute	position,
His	hearing	is	wholly	identical	with	His	eating	and	tasting.	Only	the	devotee,
who	accepts	Kṛṣṇa	as	He	describes	Himself,	without	interpretation,	can
understand	that	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth	can	eat	food	and	enjoy	it.
TEXT	27य ᇰ क र ो ि ष
	
य द ᇽ न ा ि स
	
य ᇬ ज ु ह ो ि ष
	
द द ा ि स
	
य त ्
	
।
य ሧ प ᇿ य ि स
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
त ᇰ क ु ኄ ᇾ व
	
म द प ᆼ ण म ्
	
॥
२ ७
॥
yat	karoṣi	yad	aśnāsi
yaj	juhoṣi	dadāsi	yat
yat	tapasyasi	kaunteya
tat	kuruṣva	mad	arpaṇam
yat
—what;	
karoṣi
—you	do;	
yat
—whatever;	
aśnāsi
—you	eat;	
yat
—
whatever;	
juhoṣi—
you	offer;	
dadāsi—
you	give	away;	
yat
—whatever;	
yat
—
whatever;	
tapasyasi
—austerities	you	perform;	
kaunteya—
O	son	of	Kuntī;	
tat
—that;	
kuruṣva
—make;	
mat
—unto	Me;	
arpaṇam
—offering.
TRANSLATION
O	son	of	Kuntī,	all	that	you	do,	all	that	you	eat,	all	that	you	offer	and
give	away,	as	well	as	all	austerities	that	you	may	perform,	should	be	done
as	an	offering	unto	Me.
PURPORT
Thus,	it	is	the	duty	of	everyone	to	mold	his	life	in	such	a	way	that	he	will
not	forget	Kṛṣṇa	in	any	circumstance.	Everyone	has	to	work	for	maintenance
of	his	body	and	soul	together,	and	Kṛṣṇa	recommends	herein	that	one	should
work	for	Him.	Everyone	has	to	eat	something	to	live;	therefore	he	should
accept	the	remnants	of	foodstuffs	offered	to	Kṛṣṇa.	Any	civilized	man	has	to
perform	some	religious	ritualistic	ceremonies;	therefore	Kṛṣṇa	recommends,
"Do	it	for	Me,"	and	this	is	called	
arcanā.	
Everyone	has	a	tendency	to	give
something	in	charity;	Kṛṣṇa	says,	"Give	it	to	Me,"	and	this	means	that	all
surplus	money	accummulated	should	be	utilized	in	furthering	the	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	movement.	Nowadays	people	are	very	much	inclined	to	the
meditational	process,	which	is	not	practical	in	this	age,	but	if	anyone	practices
meditating	on	Kṛṣṇa	twenty-four	hours	by	chanting	the	Hare	Kṛṣṇa	
mantra
round	his	beads,	he	is	surely	the	greatest	
yogī
,	as	substantiated	by	the	Sixth
Chapter	of	
Bhagavad-gītā.TEXT	28
श ु भ ा श ु भ फ ल ै र े व ं
	
म ो ቎ य स े
	
क म ᆼ ब ᇳ ध न ै ः
	
।
स ं ᇳ य ा स य ो ग य ु ᇧ त ा ᇰ म ा
	
ि व म ु ᇧ त ो
	
म ा म ु प ै ᇾ य ि स
	
॥
२ ८
॥
śubhāśubha-phalair	evaṁ
mokṣyase	karma-bandhanaiḥ
sannyāsa-yoga-yuktātmā
vimukto	mām	upaiṣyasi
śubha—
good;	
aśubha—
evil;
	phalaiḥ—
results;	
evam—
thus;	
mokṣyase—
free;
karma
—action;	
bandhanaiḥ—
bondage;	
sannyāsa
—of	renunciation;	
yoga
—
the	yoga;	
yukta-ātmā
—having	the	mind	firmly	set	on;	
vimuktaḥ—
liberated;
mām—
to	Me;	
upaiṣyasi—
you	will	attain.
TRANSLATION
In	this	way	you	will	be	freed	from	all	reactions	to	good	and	evil	deeds,
and	by	this	principle	of	renunciation	you	will	be	liberated	and	come	to
Me.
PURPORT
One	who	acts	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	under	superior	direction	is	called
yukta
.	The	technical	term	is	
yukta-vairāgya
.	This	is	further	explained	by	Rūpa
Gosvāmī	as	follows.
Rūpa	Gosvāmī	says	that	as	long	as	we	are	in	this	material	world	we	have	to
act;	we	cannot	cease	acting.	Therefore	if	actions	are	performed	and	the	fruits
are	given	to	Kṛṣṇa,	then	that	is	called	
yukta-vairāgya.
	Actually	situated	in
renunciation,	such	activities	clear	the	mirror	of	the	mind,	and	as	the	actor
gradually	makes	progress	in	spiritual	realization	he	becomes	completely
surrendered	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Therefore	at	the	end	he
becomes	liberated,	and	this	liberation	is	also	specified.	By	this	liberation	he
does	not	become	one	with	the	
brahmajyoti
	but	rather	enters	into	the	planet	of
the	Supreme	Lord.	It	is	clearly	mentioned	here:	
mām	upaiṣyasi,
	"he	comes	to
Me,"	back	home,	back	to	Godhead.	There	are	five	different	stages	ofliberation,	and	here	it	is	specified	that	the	devotee	who	has	always	lived	his
lifetime	here	under	the	direction	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	as	stated,	has	evolved
to	the	point	where	he	can,	after	quitting	this	body,	go	back	to	Godhead	and
engage	directly	in	the	association	of	the	Supreme	Lord.
Anyone	who	has	no	other	interest	but	to	dedicate	his	life	to	the	service	of
the	Lord	is	actually	a
	sannyāsī
	Such	a	person	always	thinks	of	himself	as	an
eternal	servant,	dependant	on	the	supreme	will	of	the	Lord.	As	such,	whatever
he	does,	he	does	it	for	the	benefit	of	the	Lord.	Whatever	action	he	performs,
he	performs	it	as	service	to	the	Lord.	He	does	not	give	serious	attention	to	the
fruitive	activities	or	prescribed	duties	mentioned	in	the	
Vedas
.	For	ordinary
persons	it	is	obligatory	to	execute	the	prescribed	duties	mentioned	in	the
Vedas
,	but	although	a	pure	devotee	who	is	completely	engaged	in	the	service
of	the	Lord	may	sometimes	appear	to	go	against	the	prescribed	Vedic	duties,
actually	it	is	not	so.
It	is	said,	therefore,	by	Vaiṣṇava	authorities	that	even	the	most	intelligent
person	cannot	understand	the	plans	and	activities	of	a	pure	devotee.	The	exact
words	are	
vaiṣṇavera	kriyā	mudrā	vijñe	nā	bujhayā
.	A	person	who	is	thus
always	engaged	in	the	service	of	the	Lord	or	is	always	thinking	and	planning
how	to	serve	the	Lord	is	to	be	considered	completely	liberated	at	present	and
in	the	future.	His	going	home,	back	to	Godhead,	is	guaranteed.	He	is	above	all
materialistic	criticism,	just	as	Kṛṣṇa	is	above	all	criticism.
TEXT	29
स म ो ऽ ह ं
	
स व ᆼ भ ू त े ष ु
	
न
	
म े
	
ሲ े ᇾ य ो ऽ ि ᇿ त
	
न
	
ि प ् र य ः
	
।
य े
	
भ ज ि ᇳ त
	
त ु
	
म ा ं
	
भ ᇧ ᇰ य ा
	
म ि य
	
त े
	
त े ष ु
	
च ा ᇴ य ह म ्
	
॥
९
-	
२ ९
samo	'haṁ	sarva-bhūteṣu
na	me	dveṣyo	'sti	na	priyaḥ
ye	bhajanti	tu	māṁ	bhaktyā
mayi	te	teṣu	cāpy	aham
samaḥ—
equally	disposed;	
aham—
I;
	sarva-bhūteṣu—
to	all	living	entities;	
na
—
no	one;	
me—
Mine;	
dveṣyaḥ—
hateful;	
asti—
is;
	na—
nor;	
priyaḥ—
dear;	
ye
—
those;	
bhajanti—
render	transcendental	service;	
tu—
yet;	
mām—
unto	Me;
bhaktyā—
in	devotion;	
mayi—
unto	Me;	
te—
such	persons;	
teṣu—
in	them;	
ca
—
also;	
api—
certainly;	
aham—
I.TRANSLATION
I	envy	no	one,	nor	am	I	partial	to	anyone.	I	am	equal	to	all.	But
whoever	renders	service	unto	Me	in	devotion	is	a	friend,	is	in	Me,	and	I
am	also	a	friend	to	him.
PURPORT
One	may	question	here	that	if	Kṛṣṇa	is	equal	to	everyone	and	no	one	is	His
special	friend,	then	why	does	He	take	a	special	interest	in	the	devotees	who
are	always	engaged	in	His	transcendental	service?	But	this	is	not
discrimination;	it	is	natural.	Any	man	in	this	material	world	may	be	very
charitably	disposed,	yet	he	has	a	special	interest	in	his	own	children.	The	Lord
claims	that	every	living	entity–in	whatever	form-is	His	son,	and	as	such	He
provides	everyone	with	a	generous	supply	of	the	necessities	of	life.	He	is	just
like	a	cloud	which	pours	rain	all	over,	regardless	whether	it	falls	on	rock	or
land	or	water.	But	for	His	devotees,	He	gives	specific	attention.	Such	devotees
are	mentioned	here:	they	are	always	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	and	therefore
they	are	always	transcendentally	situated	in	Kṛṣṇa.	The	very	phrase	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	suggests	that	those	who	are	in	such	consciousness	are	living
transcendentalists,	situated	in	Him.	The	Lord	says	here	distinctly,	"
mayi	te
,"
"in	Me."	Naturally,	as	a	result,	the	Lord	is	also	in	them.	This	is	reciprocal.
This	also	explains	the	words:	
asti	na	priyaḥ/ye	bhajanti:
	"Whoever	surrenders
unto	Me,	proportionately	I	take	care	of	him."	This	transcendental
reciprocation	exists	because	both	the	Lord	and	the	devotee	are	conscious.
When	a	diamond	is	set	in	a	golden	ring,	it	looks	very	nice.	The	gold	is
glorified,	and	at	the	same	time	the	diamond	is	glorified.	The	Lord	and	the
living	entity	eternally	glitter,	and	when	a	living	entity	becomes	inclined	to	the
service	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	he	looks	like	gold.	The	Lord	is	a	diamond,	and
so	this	combination	is	very	nice.	Living	entities	in	a	pure	state	are	called
devotees.	The	Supreme	Lord	becomes	the	devotee	of	His	devotees.	If	a
reciprocal	relationship	is	not	present	between	the	devotee	and	the	Lord,	then
there	is	no	personalist	philosophy.	In	the	impersonal	philosophy	there	is	no
reciprocation	between	the	Supreme	and	the	living	entity,	but	in	the	personalist
philosophy	there	is.
The	example	is	often	given	that	the	Lord	is	like	a	desire	tree,	and	whatever
one	wants	from	this	desire	tree,	the	Lord	supplies.	But	here	the	explanation	ismore	complete.	The	Lord	is	here	stated	to	be	partial	to	the	devotees.	This	is
the	manifestation	of	the	Lord's	special	mercy	to	the	devotees.	The	Lord's
reciprocation	should	not	be	considered	to	be	under	the	law	of	
karma.	
It
belongs	to	the	transcendental	situation	in	which	the	Lord	and	His	devotees
function.	Devotional	service	of	the	Lord	is	not	an	activity	of	this	material
world;	it	is	part	of	the	spiritual	world	where	eternity,	bliss	and	knowledge
predominate.
TEXT	30
अ ि प
	
च े ᇰ स ु द ु र ा च ा र ो
	
भ ज त े
	
म ा म न ᇳ य भ ा क ्
	
।
स ा ध ु र े व
	
स
	
म ᇳ त ᇼ य ः
	
स ᇸ य ᇩ ᇼ य व ि स त ो
	
ि ह
	
स ः
	
॥
३ ०
॥
api	cet	sudurācāro
bhajate	mām	ananya-bhāk
sādhur	eva	sa	mantavyaḥ
samyag	vyavasito	hi	saḥ
api—
in	spite	of;	
cet—
although;	
sudurācāraḥ—
one	committing	the	most
abominable	actions;	
bhajate—
engaged	in	devotional	service;	
mām—
unto	Me;
ananya-bhāk—
without	deviation;	
sādhuḥ—
saint;	
eva—
certainly;	
saḥ—
he;
mantavyaḥ—
to	be	considered;	
samyak—
completely;	
vyavasitaḥ—
situated;	
hi
—
certainly;	
saḥ—
he.
TRANSLATION
Even	if	one	commits	the	most	abominable	actions,	if	he	is	engaged	in
devotional	service,	he	is	to	be	considered	saintly	because	he	is	properly
situated.
PURPORT
The	word	
sudurācāro	
used	in	this	verse	is	very	significant,	and	we	should
understand	it	properly.	When	a	living	entity	is	conditioned,	he	has	two	kinds
of	activities:	one	is	conditional,	and	the	other	is	constitutional.	As	for
protecting	the	body	or	abiding	by	the	rules	of	society	and	state,	certainly	thereare	different	activities,	even	for	the	devotees,	in	connection	with	the
conditional	life,	and	such	activities	are	called	conditional.	Besides	these,	the
living	entity	who	is	fully	conscious	of	his	spiritual	nature	and	is	engaged	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	or	the	devotional	service	of	the	Lord,	has	activities
which	are	called	transcendental.	Such	activities	are	performed	in	his
constitutional	position,	and	they	are	technically	called	devotional	service.
Now,	in	the	conditioned	state,	sometimes	devotional	service	and	the
conditional	service	in	relation	to	the	body	will	parallel	one	another.	But	then
again,	sometimes	these	activities	become	opposed	to	one	another.	As	far	as
possible,	a	devotee	is	very	cautious	so	that	he	does	not	do	anything	that	could
disrupt	his	wholesome	condition.	He	knows	that	perfection	in	his	activities
depends	on	his	progressive	realization	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Sometimes,
however,	it	may	be	seen	that	a	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	commits	some
act	which	may	be	taken	as	most	abominable	socially	or	politically.	But	such	a
temporary	falldown	does	not	disqualify	him.	In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
it	is
stated	that	if	a	person	falls	down,	but	is	wholeheartedly	engaged	in	the
transcendental	service	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	the	Lord,	being	situated	within
his	heart,	beautifies	him	and	excuses	him	from	that	abomination.	The	material
contamination	is	so	strong	that	even	a	
yogī
	fully	engaged	in	the	service	of	the
Lord	sometimes	becomes	ensnared;	but	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	so	strong	that
such	an	occasional	falldown	is	at	once	rectified.	Therefore	the	process	of
devotional	service	is	always	a	success.	No	one	should	deride	a	devotee	for
some	accidental	falldown	from	the	ideal	path,	for,	as	is	explained	in	the	next
verse,	such	occasional	falldowns	will	be	stopped	in	due	course,	as	soon	as	a
devotee	is	completely	situated	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
Therefore	a	person	who	is	situated	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	is	engaged
with	determination	in	the	process	of	chanting	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa
Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/Hare	Rāma,	Hare	Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,	Hare	Hare	should	be
considered	to	be	in	the	transcendental	position,	even	if	by	chance	or	accident
he	is	found	to	have	fallen.	The	words	
sādhur	eva,	
"he	is	saintly,"	are	very
emphatic.	They	are	a	warning	to	the	nondevotees	that	because	of	an	accidental
falldown	a	devotee	should	not	be	derided;	he	should	still	be	considered	saintly
even	if	he	has	fallen	down	accidentally.	And	the	word	
mantavyaḥ	
is	still	more
emphatic.	If	one	does	not	follow	this	rule,	and	derides	a	devotee	for	his
accidental	falldown,	then	he	is	disobeying	the	order	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	The
only	qualification	of	a	devotee	is	to	be	unflinchingly	and	exclusively	engaged
in	devotional	service.
The	mark	of	a	spot	which	may	be	seen	on	the	moon	does	not	become	animpediment	to	the	moonlight.	Similarly,	the	accidental	falldown	of	a	devotee
from	the	path	of	a	saintly	character	does	not	make	him	abominable.	On	the
other	hand,	one	should	not	misunderstand	that	a	devotee	in	transcendental
devotional	service	can	act	in	all	kinds	of	abominable	ways;	this	verse	only
refers	to	an	accident	due	to	the	strong	power	of	material	connections.
Devotional	service	is	more	or	less	a	declaration	of	war	against	the	illusory
energy.	As	long	as	one	is	not	strong	enough	to	fight	the	illusory	energy,	there
may	be	accidental	falldowns.	But	when	one	is	strong	enough,	he	is	no	longer
subjected	to	such	falldowns,	as	previously	explained.	No	one	should	take
advantage	of	this	verse	and	commit	nonsense	and	think	that	he	is	still	a
devotee.	If	he	does	not	improve	in	his	character	by	devotional	service,	then	it
is	to	be	understood	that	he	is	not	a	high	devotee.
TEXT	31
ि ᇤ प ् र ं
	
भ व ि त
	
ध म ा ᆼ ᇰ म ा
	
श ᇽ व ᇫ छ ा ि ᇳ त ं
	
ि न ग ᇫ छ ि त
	
।
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
प ् र ि त ज ा न ी ि ह
	
न
	
म े
	
भ ᇧ त ः
	
प ् र ण ᇽ य ि त
	
॥
३ १
॥
kṣipraṁ	bhavati	dharmātmā
śaśvac-chāntiṁ	nigacchati
kaunteya	pratijānīhi
na	me	bhaktaḥ	praṇaśyati
kṣipram—
very	soon;	
bhavati—
becomes;	
dharma-ātmā—
righteous;	
śaśvat-
śāntim—
lasting	peace;	
nigacchati—
attains;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of	Kuntī;
pratijānīhi—
justly	declare;	
na—
never;	
me—
Mine;	
bhaktaḥ—
devotee;
praṇaśyati—
perishes.
TRANSLATION
He	quickly	becomes	righteous	and	attains	lasting	peace.	O	son	of	Kuntī,
declare	it	boldly	that	My	devotee	never	perishes.
PURPORT
This	should	not	be	misunderstood.	In	the	Seventh	Chapter	the	Lord	saysthat	one	who	is	engaged	in	mischievous	activities	cannot	become	a	devotee	of
the	Lord.	One	who	is	not	a	devotee	of	the	Lord	has	no	good	qualifications
whatsoever.	The	question	remains,	then,	how	can	a	person	engaged	in
abominable	activities
—
either	by	accident	or	intention
—
be	a	pure	devotee?
This	question	may	justly	be	raised.	The	miscreants,	as	stated	in	the	Seventh
Chapter,	who	never	come	to	the	devotional	service	of	the	Lord,	have	no	good
qualifications,	as	is	stated	in	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.	
Generally,	a	devotee
who	is	engaged	in	the	nine	kinds	of	devotional	activities	is	engaged	in	the
process	of	cleansing	all	material	contamination	from	the	heart.	He	puts	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	within	his	heart,	and	all	sinful
contaminations	are	naturally	washed	away.	Continuous	thinking	of	the
Supreme	Lord	makes	him	pure	by	nature.	According	to	the	
Vedas
,	there	is	a
certain	regulation	that	if	one	falls	down	from	his	exalted	position,	he	has	to
undergo	certain	ritualistic	processes	to	purify	himself.	But	here	there	is	no
such	condition	because	the	purifying	process	is	already	there	in	the	heart	of
the	devotee,	due	to	his	remembering	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead
constantly.	Therefore,	the	chanting	of	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,
Hare	Hare/	Hare	Rāma,	Hare	Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,	Hare	Hare	should	be
continued	without	stoppage.	This	will	protect	a	devotee	from	all	accidental
falldowns.	He	will	thus	remain	perpetually	free	from	all	material
contaminations.
TEXT	32
म ा ं
	
ि ह
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
ᇼ य प ा ि श ् र ᇰ य
	
य े ऽ ि प
	
ᇿ य ु ः
	
प ा प य ो न य ः
	
।
ि ᇿ त ् र य ो
	
व ै ᇽ य ा ᇿ त थ ा
	
श ू द ् र ा ᇿ त े ऽ ि प
	
य ा ि ᇳ त
	
प र ा ं
	
ग ि त म ्
	
॥
३ २
॥
māṁ	hi	pārtha	vyapāśritya
ye	'pi	syuḥ	pāpa-yonayaḥ
striyo	vaiśyās	tathā	śūdrās
te	'pi	yānti	parāṁ	gatim
mām—
unto	Me;	
hi
-certainly;	
pārtha—
O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
vyapāśrītya—
particularly	taking	shelter;	
ye—
anyone;	
api—
also;	syuḥ
—
becomes;	
pāpa-
yonayaḥ
—born	of	a	lower	family;	
striyaḥ
—women;	
vaiśyāḥ
—mercantile
people;	
tathā
—also;	
śūdrāḥ
—lower	class	men;	
te	api
—even	they;	
yānti
—go;
parām
—supreme;	
gatim
—destination.TRANSLATION
O	son	of	Pṛthā,	those	who	take	shelter	in	Me,	though	they	be	of	lower
birth—women,	vaiśyas	[merchants],	as	well	as	śūdras	[workers]—can
approach	the	supreme	destination.
PURPORT
It	is	clearly	declared	here	by	the	Supreme	Lord	that	in	devotional	service
there	is	no	distinction	between	the	lower	or	higher	classes	of	people.	In	the
material	conception	of	life,	there	are	such	divisions,	but	for	a	person	engaged
in	transcendental	devotional	service	to	the	Lord,	there	are	not.	Everyone	is
eligible	for	the	supreme	destination.	In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
it	is	stated
that	even	the	lowest,	who	are	called	
caṇḍālas	
(dog-eaters),	can	be	elevated	by
association	with	a	pure	devotee.	Therefore	devotional	service	and	guidance	of
a	pure	devotee	are	so	strong	that	there	is	no	discrimination	between	the	lower
and	higher	classes	of	men;	anyone	can	take	to	it.	The	most	simple	man	taking
center	of	the	pure	devotee	can	be	purified	by	proper	guidance.	According	to
the	different	modes	of	material	nature,	men	are	classified	in	the	mode	of
goodness	
(brāhmaṇas),	
the	mode	of	passion	
(kṣatriyas,	
or	administrators),	the
mixed	modes	of	passion	and	ignorance	
(vaiśyas,	
or	merchants),	and	the	mode
of	ignorance	
(śūdras,	
or	workers).	Those	lower	than	them	are	called	
caṇḍālas,
and	they	are	born	in	sinful	families.	Generally,	those	who	are	born	in	sinful
families	are	not	accepted	by	the	higher	classes.	But	the	process	of	devotional
service	and	the	pure	devotee	of	the	Supreme	God	are	so	strong	that	all	the
lower	classes	can	attain	the	highest	perfection	of	life.	This	is	possible	only
when	one	takes	center	of	Kṛṣṇa.	One	has	to	take	center	completely	of	Kṛṣṇa.
Then	one	can	become	much	greater	than	great	
jñānīs	
and	
yogīs.
TEXT	33
ि क ं
	
प ु न ब ् र ा ᆼ ቊ ण ा ः
	
प ु ᇯ य ा
	
भ ᇧ त ा
	
र ा ज ष ᆼ य ᇿ त थ ा
	
।
अ ि न ᇰ य म स ु ख ं
	
ल ो क ि म म ं
	
प ् र ा ᇴ य
	
भ ज ᇿ व
	
म ा म ्
	
॥
३ ३
॥
kiṁ	punar	brāhmaṇāḥ	puṇyā
bhaktā	rājarṣayas	tathāanityam	asukhaṁ	lokam
imaṁ	prāpya	bhajasva	mām
kim—
how	much;	
punaḥ—
again;	
brāhmaṇāḥ-brāhmaṇas;	puṇyāḥ
—
righteous;
bhaktāḥ
—devotees;	
rājarṣayaḥ—
saintly	kings;	
tathā
—also;
anityam
—	temporary;	
asukham—
sorrowful;	
lokam—
planets;	
imam—
this;
prāpya—	
gaining;	
bhajasva—
are	engaged	in	loving	service;	
mām—
unto	Me.
TRANSLATION
How	much	greater	then	are	the	brāhmaṇas,	the	righteous,	the	devotees
and	saintly	kings	who	in	this	temporary	miserable	world	engage	in	loving
service	unto	Me.
PURPORT
In	this	material	world	there	are	classifications	of	people,	but,	after	all,	this
world	is	not	a	happy	place	for	anyone.	It	is	clearly	stated	here,	
anityam
asukhaṁ	lokam:	
this	world	is	temporary	and	full	of	miseries,	not	habitable	for
any	sane	gentleman.	This	world	is	declared	by	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead	to	be	temporary	and	full	of	miseries.	Some	of	the	philosophers,
especially	the	minor	philosophers,	say	that	this	world	is	false,	but	we	can
understand	from	
Bhagavad-gītā	
that	the	world	is	not	false;	it	is	temporary.
There	is	a	difference	between	temporary	and	false.	This	world	is	temporary,
but	there	is	another	world	which	is	eternal.	This	world	is	miserable,	but	the
other	world	is	eternal	and	blissful.
Arjuna	was	born	in	a	saintly	royal	family.	To	him	also	the	Lord	says,	"Take
to	My	devotional	service	and	come	quickly	back	to	Godhead,	back	home."	No
one	should	remain	in	this	temporary	world,	full	as	it	is	with	miseries.
Everyone	should	attach	himself	to	the	bosom	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead	so	that	he	can	be	eternally	happy.	The	devotional	service	of	the
Supreme	Lord	is	the	only	process	by	which	all	problems	of	all	classes	of	men
can	be	solved.	Everyone	should	therefore	take	to	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and
make	his	life	perfect.
TEXT	34म ᇳ म न ा
	
भ व
	
म द ् भ ᇧ त ो
	
म ሱ ा ज ी
	
म ा ं
	
न म ᇿ क ु ኄ
	
।
म ा म े व ै ᇾ य ि स
	
य ु ᇧ ᇰ व ै व म ा ᇰ म ा न ं
	
म ᇰ प र ा य ण ः
	
॥
३ ४
॥
man-manā	bhava	mad-bhakto
mad-yājī	māṁ	namaskuru
mām	evaiṣyasi	yuktvaivam
ātmānaṁ	mat-parāyaṇaḥ
mat-manāḥ
—always	thinking	of	Me;	
bhava—
become;	
mat
—My;	
bhaktaḥ
—	
devotee;	
mat
—My;	
yājī
—worshiper;	
mām
—unto	Me;	
namaskuru—
offer
obeisances;	
mām
—unto	Me;	
eva
—completely;	
eṣyasi
—come;	
yuktvā	evam
—
being	absorbed;	
ātmānam
—your	soul;	
mat-parāyaṇaḥ—
devoted	to	Me.
TRANSLATION
Engage	your	mind	always	in	thinking	of	Me,	offer	obeisances	and
worship	Me.	Being	completely	absorbed	in	Me,	surely	you	will	come	to
Me.
PURPORT
In	this	verse	it	is	clearly	indicated	that	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	the	only
means	of	being	delivered	from	the	clutches	of	this	contaminated	material
world.	Sometimes	unscrupulous	commentators	distort	the	meaning	of	what	is
clearly	stated	here:	that	all	devotional	service	should	be	offered	to	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa.	Unfortunately,	unscrupulous
commentators	divert	the	mind	of	the	reader	to	that	which	is	not	at	all	feasible.
Such	commentators	do	not	know	that	there	is	no	difference	between	Kṛṣṇa's
mind	and	Kṛṣṇa.	Kṛṣṇa	is	not	an	ordinary	human	being;	He	is	Absolute	Truth.
His	body,	mind	and	He	Himself	are	one	and	absolute.	It	is	stated	in	the	
Kūrma
Purāṇa.	
as	it	is	quoted	by	Bhaktisiddhānta	Sarasvatī	Gosvāmī	in	his
Anubhāṣya	
comments	on	
Caitanya-caritāmrta,	
Fifth	Chapter,	
Ādi-līlā,	
verses
41-48,	
"deha-dehi-vibhedo	'yaṁ	neśvare	vidyate	kvacit,"	
which	means	that
there	is	no	difference	in	Kṛṣṇa,	the	Supreme	Lord,	between	Himself	and	His
body.	But,	because	they	do	not	know	this	science	of	Kṛṣṇa,	the	commentators
hide	Kṛṣṇa	and	divide	His	personality	from	His	mind	or	from	His	body.
Although	this	is	sheer	ignorance	of	the	science	of	Kṛṣṇa,	some	men	makeprofit	out	of	misleading	the	people.
There	are	some	who	are	demonic;	they	also	think	of	Kṛṣṇa,	but	enviously,
just	like	King	Kaṁsa,	Kṛṣṇa's	uncle.	He	was	also	thinking	of	Kṛṣṇa	always,
but	he	thought	of	Kṛṣṇa	as	his	enemy.	He	was	always	in	anxiety,	wondering
when	Kṛṣṇa	would	come	to	kill	him.	That	kind	of	thinking	will	not	help	us.
One	should	be	thinking	of	Kṛṣṇa	in	devotional	love.	That	is	
bhakti.	
One
should	cultivate	the	knowledge	of	Kṛṣṇa	continually.	What	is	that	favorable
cultivation?	It	is	to	learn	from	a	bona	fide	teacher.	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	and	we	have	several	times	explained	that	His	body	is
not	material,	but	is	eternal,	blissful	knowledge.	This	kind	of	talk	about	Kṛṣṇa
will	help	one	become	a	devotee.	Otherwise,	understanding	Kṛṣṇa	from	the
wrong	source	will	prove	fruitless.
One	should	therefore	engage	his	mind	in	the	eternal	form,	the	primal	form
of	Kṛṣṇa;	with	conviction	in	his	heart	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme,	he	should
engage	himself	in	worship.	There	are	hundreds	of	thousands	of	temples	in
India	for	the	worship	of	Kṛṣṇa,	and	devotional	service	is	practiced	there.
When	such	practice	is	made,	one	has	to	offer	obeisances	to	Kṛṣṇa.	One	should
lower	his	head	before	the	Deity	and	engage	his	mind,	his	body,	his	activities-
everything.	That	will	make	one	fully	absorbed	in	Kṛṣṇa	without	deviation.
This	will	help	one	transfer	into	the	Kṛṣṇaloka.	One	should	not	be	deviated	by
unscrupulous	commentators.	One	must	engage	in	the	nine	different	processes
of	devotional	service,	beginning	with	hearing	and	chanting	about	Kṛṣṇa.	Pure
devotional	service	is	the	highest	achievement	of	human	society.
In	the	Seventh	and	Eighth	Chapters	of	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
pure	devotional
service	to	the	Lord	has	been	explained,	apart	from	the	
yoga	
of	knowledge	and
mystic	
yoga	
or	fruitive	activities.	Those	who	are	not	purely	sanctified	may	be
attracted	by	different	features	of	the	Lord,	like	the	impersonal	
brahmajyoti	
and
localized	Paramātmā,	but	a	pure	devotee	directly	takes	to	the	service	of	the
Supreme	Lord.
There	is	a	beautiful	poem	about	Kṛṣṇa	in	which	it	is	clearly	stated	that	any
person	who	is	engaged	in	the	worship	of	demigods	is	most	unintelligent	and
cannot	achieve	at	any	time	the	supreme	award	of	Kṛṣṇa.	The	devotee,	in	the
beginning,	may	sometimes	fall	from	the	standard,	but	still	he	should	be
considered	superior	to	all	other	philosophers	and	
yogīs.	
One	who	always
engages	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	should	be	understood	to	be	the	perfect	saintly
person.	His	accidental	nondevotional	activities	will	diminish,	and	he	will	soon
be	situated	without	any	doubt	in	complete	perfection.	The	pure	devotee	has	no
actual	chance	to	fall	down	because	the	Supreme	Godhead	personally	takescare	of	His	pure	devotees.	Therefore,	the	intelligent	person	should	take
directly	to	this	process	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	happily	live	in	this
material	world.	He	will	eventually	receive	the	supreme	award	of	Kṛṣṇa.
Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	Ninth	Chapter	of	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhagavad-gītā
	in	the	matter	of	the	Most	Confidential	Knowledge.Chapter-10
CHAPTER	TEN
The	Opulence	of	the	Absolute
TEXT	1
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
भ ू य
	
ए व
	
म ह ा ब ा ह ो
	
श ृ ण ु
	
म े
	
प र म ं
	
व च ः
	
।
य ሧ े ऽ ह ं
	
प ् र ी य म ा ण ा य
	
व ቎ य ा ि म
	
ि ह त क ा ᇸ य य ा
	
॥
१
॥
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
bhūya	eva	mahā-bāho
śṛṇu	me	paramaṁ	vacaḥ
yat	te	'haṁ	prīyamāṇāyavakṣyāmi	hita-kāmyayā
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
bhūyaḥ
—
again;	
eva—
certainly;	
mahā-bāho
—O	mighty-armed;	
śṛṇu
—just	hear;	
me
—
My;
	paramaṁ—
supreme;	
vacaḥ—
information;	
yat—
that	which;	
te—
to	you;
aham—
I;
	prīyamāṇāya—
thinking	you	dear	to	Me;	
vakṣyāmi—
say;	
hita-
kāmyayā—
for	your	benefit.
TRANSLATION
The	Supreme	Lord	said:	My	dear	friend,	mighty-armed	Arjuna,	listen
again	to	My	supreme	word,	which	I	shall	impart	to	you	for	your	benefit
and	which	will	give	you	great	joy.
PURPORT
The	word	
paramam	
is	explained	thus	by	Parāśara	Muni:	one	who	is	full	in
six	opulences,	who	has	full	strength,	full	fame,	wealth,	knowledge,	beauty	and
renunciation,	is	
paramam,	
or	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	While
Kṛṣṇa	was	present	on	this	earth,	He	displayed	all	six	opulences.	Therefore
great	sages	like	Parāśara	Muni	have	all	accepted	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.	Now	Kṛṣṇa	is	instructing	Arjuna	in	more	confidential
knowledge	of	His	opulences	and	His	work.	Previously,	beginning	with	the
Seventh	Chapter,	the	Lord	already	explained	His	different	energies	and	how
they	are	acting.	Now	in	this	chapter	He	explains	His	specific	opulences	to
Arjuna.	In	the	previous	chapter	he	has	clearly	explained	His	different	energies
to	establish	devotion	in	firm	conviction.	Again	in	this	chapter	He	tells	Arjuna
about	His	manifestations	and	various	opulences.
The	more	one	hears	about	the	Supreme	God,	the	more	one	becomes	fixed	in
devotional	service.	One	should	always	hear	about	the	Lord	in	the	association
of	devotees;	that	will	enhance	one's	devotional	service.	Discourses	in	the
society	of	devotees	can	take	place	only	among	those	who	are	really	anxious	to
be	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Others	cannot	take	part	in	such	discourses.	The
Lord	clearly	tells	Arjuna	that	because	he	is	very	dear	to	Him,	for	his	benefit
such	discourses	are	taking	place.
TEXT	2न
	
म े
	
ि व द ु ः
	
स ु र ग ण ा ः
	
प ् र भ व ं
	
न
	
म ह ष ᆼ य ः
	
।
अ ह म ा ि द ि ह ᆼ
	
द े व ा न ा ं
	
म ह ष ी ᆼ ण ा ं
	
च
	
स व ᆼ श ः
	
॥
२
॥
na	me	viduḥ	sura-gaṇāḥ
prabhavaṁ	na	maharṣayaḥ
aham	ādir	hi	devānāṁ
maharṣīṇāṁ	ca	sarvaśaḥ
na
—never;	
me
—My;	
viduḥ
—knows;	
sura-gaṇāḥ
—demigods;	
prabhavam
—	opulences;	
na
—never;	
maharṣayaḥ
—great	sages;	
aham
—I	am;	
ādiḥ—
the
origin;	
hi
—certainly;	
devānām
—of	the	demigods;	
maharṣīṇām
—of	the	great
sages;	
ca
—also;	
sarvaśaḥ
—in	all	respects.
TRANSLATION
Neither	the	hosts	of	demigods	nor	the	great	sages	know	My	origin,	for,
in	every	respect,	I	am	the	source	of	the	demigods	and	the	sages.
PURPORT
As	stated	in	the	
Brahma-saṁhitā,	
Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme	Lord.	No	one
is	greater	than	Him;	He	is	the	cause	of	all	causes.	Here	it	is	also	stated	by	the
Lord	personally	that	He	is	the	cause	of	all	the	demigods	and	sages.	Even	the
demigods	and	great	sages	cannot	understand	Kṛṣṇa;	they	can	understand
neither	His	name	nor	His	personality,	so	what	is	the	position	of	the	so-called
scholars	of	this	tiny	planet?	No	one	can	understand	why	this	Supreme	God
comes	to	earth	as	an	ordinary	human	being	and	executes	such	commonplace
and	yet	wonderful	activities.	One	should	know,	then,	that	scholarship	is	not
the	qualification	necessary	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa.	Even	the	demigods	and	the
great	sages	have	tried	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa	by	their	mental	speculation,	and
they	have	failed	to	do	so.	In	the	
Śrīmad-	Bhāgavatam	
also	it	is	clearly	said
that	even	the	great	demigods	are	not	able	to	understand	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.	They	can	speculate	to	the	limits	of	their	imperfect
senses	and	can	reach	the	opposite	conclusion	of	impersonalism,	of	something
not	manifested	by	the	three	qualities	of	material	nature,	or	they	can	imagine
something	by	mental	speculation,	but	it	is	not	possible	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa	by
such	foolish	speculation.Here	the	Lord	indirectly	says	that	if	anyone	wants	to	know	the	Absolute
Truth,	"Here	I	am	present	as	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	I	am	the
Supreme."	One	should	know	this.	Although	one	cannot	understand	the
inconceivable	Lord	who	is	personally	present,	He	nonetheless	exists.	We	can
actually	understand	Kṛṣṇa,	who	is	eternal,	full	of	bliss	and	knowledge,	simply
by	studying	His	words	in	
Bhagavad-gītā	
and	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.	
The
impersonal	Brahman	can	be	conceived	by	persons	who	are	already	in	the
inferior	energy	of	the	Lord,	but	the	Personality	of	Godhead	cannot	be
conceived	unless	one	is	in	the	transcendental	position.
Because	most	men	cannot	understand	Kṛṣṇa	in	His	actual	situation,	out	of
His	causeless	mercy	He	descends	to	show	favor	to	such	speculators.	Yet
despite	the	Supreme	Lord's	uncommon	activities,	these	speculators,	due	to
contamination	in	the	material	energy,	still	think	that	the	impersonal	Brahman
is	the	Supreme.	Only	the	devotees	who	are	fully	surrendered	unto	the	Supreme
Lord	can	understand,	by	the	grace	of	the	Supreme	Personality,	that	He	is
Kṛṣṇa.	The	devotees	of	the	Lord	do	not	bother	about	the	impersonal	Brahman
conception	of	God;	their	faith	and	devotion	bring	them	to	surrender
immediately	unto	the	Supreme	Lord,	and	out	of	the	causeless	mercy	of	Kṛṣṇa,
they	can	understand	Kṛṣṇa.	No	one	else	can	understand	Him.	So	even	great
sages	agree:	What	is	
ātmā
,	what	is	the	Supreme?	It	is	He	whom	we	have	to
worship.
TEXT	3
य ो
	
म ा म ज म न ा ि द ं
	
च
	
व े ि ሧ
	
ल ो क म ह े ᇽ व र म ्
	
।
अ स ᇸ म ू ढ ः
	
स
	
म ᇰ य ᆹ ष ु
	
स व ᆼ प ा प ै ः
	
प ् र म ु ᇫ य त े
	
॥
३
॥
yo	mām	ajam	anādiṁ	ca
vetti	loka-maheśvaram
asammūḍhaḥ	sa	martyeṣu
sarva-pāpaiḥ	pramucyate
yaḥ—
anyone;	
mām
—unto	Me;	
ajam
—unborn;	
anādim
—without	beginning;
ca
—also;	
vetti
—knows;	
loka—
the	planets;	
maheśvaram
—supreme	master;
asaṁmūḍhaḥ—
without	doubt;	
saḥ—
he;	
martyeṣu
—among	those	subject	to
death;	
sarva-pāpaiḥ
—from	all	sinful	reactions;	
pramucyate
—is	delivered.TRANSLATION
He	who	knows	Me	as	the	unborn,	as	the	beginningless,	as	the	Supreme
Lord	of	all	the	worlds-he,	undeluded	among	men,	is	freed	from	all	sins.
PURPORT
As	stated	in	the	Seventh	Chapter,	those	who	are	trying	to	elevate	themselves
to	the	platform	of	spiritual	realization	are	not	ordinary	men.	They	are	superior
to	millions	and	millions	of	ordinary	men	who	have	no	knowledge	of	spiritual
realization,	but	out	of	those	actually	trying	to	understand	their	spiritual
situation,	one	who	can	come	to	the	understanding	that	Kṛṣṇais	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	the	proprietor	of	everything,	the	unborn,	is	the	most
successful	spiritually	realized	person.	In	that	stage	only,	when	one	has	fully
understood	Kṛṣṇa's	supreme	position,	can	one	be	free	completely	from	all
sinful	reactions.
Here	the	word	
ajam,	
meaning	unborn,	should	not	be	confused	with	the
living	entities,	who	are	described	in	the	Second	Chapter	as	
ajam.	
The	Lord	is
different	from	the	living	entities	who	are	taking	birth	and	dying	due	to
material	attachment.	The	conditional	souls	are	changing	their	bodies,	but	His
body	is	not	changeable.	Even	when	He	comes	to	this	material	world,	He
comes	as	the	same	unborn;	therefore	in	the	Fourth	Chapter	it	is	said	that	the
Lord,	by	His	internal	potency,	is	not	under	the	inferior	material	energy,	but	is
always	in	the	superior	energy.
He	was	existing	before	the	creation,	and	He	is	different	from	His	creation.
All	the	demigods	were	created	within	this	material	world,	but	as	far	as	Kṛṣṇa
is	concerned,	it	is	said	that	He	is	not	created;	therefore	Kṛṣṇa	is	different	even
from	the	great	demigods	like	Brahmā	and	Śiva.	And	because	He	is	the	creator
of	Brahmā,	Śiva	and	all	the	other	demigods,	He	is	the	Supreme	Person	of	all
planets.
Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	is	therefore	different	from	everything	that	is	created,	and	anyone
who	knows	Him	as	such	immediately	becomes	liberated	from	all	sinful
reaction.	One	must	be	liberated	from	all	sinful	activities	to	be	in	the
knowledge	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	Only	by	devotional	service	can	He	be	known
and	not	by	any	other	means,	as	stated	in	
Bhagavad-gītā.
One	should	not	try	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa	as	a	human	being.	As	statedpreviously,	only	a	foolish	person	thinks	Him	to	be	a	human	being.	This	is
again	expressed	here	in	a	different	way.	A	man	who	is	not	foolish,	who	is
intelligent	enough	to	understand	the	constitutional	position	of	the	Godhead,	is
always	free	from	all	sinful	reactions.
If	Kṛṣṇa	is	known	as	the	son	of	Devakī,	then	how	can	He	be	unborn?	That
is	also	explained	in	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:	
When	He	appeared	before	Devakī
and	Vasudeva,	He	was	not	born	as	an	ordinary	child;	He	appeared	in	His
original	form,	and	then	He	transformed	Himself	into	an	ordinary	child.
Anything	done	under	the	direction	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	transcendental.	It	cannot	be
contaminated	by	the	material	reactions,	which	may	be	auspicious	or
inauspicious.	The	conception	that	there	are	things	auspicious	and	inauspicious
in	the	material	world	is	more	or	less	a	mental	concoction	because	there	is
nothing	auspicious	in	the	material	world.	Everything	is	inauspicious	because
the	very	material	mask	is	inauspicious.	We	simply	imagine	it	to	be	auspicious.
Real	auspiciousness	depends	on	activities	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	in	full
devotion	and	service.	Therefore	if	we	at	all	want	our	activities	to	he
auspicious,	then	we	should	work	under	the	directions	of	the	Supreme	Lord.
Such	directions	are	given	in	authoritative	scriptures	such	as	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam	
and	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
or	from	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master.	Because
the	spiritual	master	is	the	representative	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	his	direction	is
directly	the	direction	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	The	spiritual	master,	saintly
persons	and	scriptures	direct	in	the	same	way.	There	is	no	contradiction	in
these	three	sources.	All	actions	done	under	such	direction	are	free	from	the
reactions	of	pious	or	impious	activities	of	this	material	world.	The
transcendental	attitude	of	the	devotee	in	the	performance	of	activities	is
actually	that	of	renunciation,	and	this	is	called	
sannyāsa.	
Anyone	acting	under
the	direction	of	the	Supreme	Lord	is	actually	a	
sannyāsī	
and	a	
yogī
,	and	not
the	man	who	has	simply	taken	the	dress	of	the	
sannyāsī,	
or	a	pseudo-
yogī
.
TEXTS	4-5
ब ु द ् ि ध ᇥ ा ᆼ न म स ᇸ म ो ह ः
	
ᇤ म ा
	
स ᇰ य ं
	
द म ः
	
श म ः
	
।
स ु ख ं
	
द ु ः ख ं
	
भ व ो ऽ भ ा व ो
	
भ य ं
	
च ा भ य म े व
	
च
	
॥
४
॥
अ ि ह ं स ा
	
स म त ा
	
त ु ि ᇾ ट ᇿ त प ो
	
द ा न ं
	
य श ो ऽ य श ः
	
।
भ व ि ᇳ त
	
भ ा व ा
	
भ ू त ा न ा ं
	
म ሧ
	
ए व
	
प ृ थ ि ᇩ व ध ा ः
	
॥
५
॥
buddhir	jñānam	asammohaḥ
kṣamā	satyaṁ	damaḥ	śamaḥsukhaṁ	duḥkhaṁ	bhavo	'bhāvo
bhayaṁ	cābhayam	eva	ca
ahiṁsā	samatā	tuṣṭis
tapo	dānaṁ	yaśo	'yaśaḥ
bhavanti	bhāvā	bhūtānāṁ
matta	eva	pṛthag-vidhāḥ
buddhiḥ—
intelligence;	
jñānam—
knowledge;	
asam-mohaḥ—
freedom	from
doubt;	
kṣamā—
forgiveness;	
satyam—
truthfulness;	
damaḥ—
control	of	the
senses;	
śamaḥ
—control	of	the	mind;	
sukham—
happiness;	
duḥkham
—distress;
bhavaḥ—
birth;	
abhāvaḥ—
death;	
bhayam—
fear;	
ca—
also;	
abhayam
—
without
fear;	
eva—
also;	
ca—
and;	
ahiṁsā—
nonviolence;	
samatā—
equilibrium;	
tuṣṭiḥ
—	
satisfaction;	
tapaḥ—
penance;	
dānam—
charity;	
yaśaḥ—
fame;	
ayaśaḥ—
infamy;	
bhavanti—
become;	
bhāvāḥ—
natures;	
bhūtānām—
of	living	entities;
mattaḥ—
from	Me;	
eva—
certainly;	
pṛthak-vidhāḥ—
differently	arranged.
TRANSLATION
Intelligence,	knowledge,	freedom	from	doubt	and	delusion,	forgiveness,
truthfulness,	self-control	and	calmness,	pleasure	and	pain,	birth,	death,
fear,	fearlessness,	nonviolence,	equanimity,	satisfaction,	austerity,	charity,
fame	and	infamy	are	created	by	Me	alone.
PURPORT
The	different	qualities	of	living	entities,	be	they	good	or	bad,	are	all	created
by	Kṛṣṇa,	and	they	are	described	here.
Intelligence	refers	to	the	power	of	analyzing	things	in	proper	perspective,
and	knowledge	refers	to	understanding	what	is	spirit	and	what	is	matter.
Ordinary	knowledge	obtained	by	a	university	education	pertains	only	to
matter,	and	it	is	not	accepted	here	as	knowledge.	Knowledge	means	knowing
the	distinction	between	spirit	and	matter.	In	modern	education	there	is	no
knowledge	about	the	spirit;	they	are	simply	taking	care	of	the	material
elements	and	bodily	needs.	Therefore	academic	knowledge	is	not	complete.
Asaṁmohaḥ,	
freedom	from	doubt	and	delusion,	can	be	achieved	when	one
is	not	hesitant	and	when	he	understands	the	transcendental	philosophy.	Slowlybut	surely	he	becomes	free	from	bewilderment.	Nothing	should	be	accepted
blindly;	everything	should	be	accepted	with	care	and	with	caution.	
Kṣamā,
forgiveness,	should	be	practiced,	and	one	should	excuse	the	minor	offenses	of
others.	
Satyam,	
truthfulness,	means	that	facts	should	be	presented	as	they	are
for	the	benefit	of	others.	Facts	should	not	be	misrepresented.	According	to
social	conventions,	it	is	said	that	one	can	speak	the	truth	only	when	it	is
palatable	to	others.	But	that	is	not	truthfulness.	The	truth	should	be	spoken	in
a	straight	and	forward	way,	so	that	others	will	understand	actually	what	the
facts	are.	If	a	man	is	a	thief	and	if	people	are	warned	that	he	is	a	thief,	that	is
truth.	Although	sometimes	the	truth	is	unpalatable,	one	should	not	refrain
from	speaking	it.	Truthfulness	demands	that	the	facts	be	presented	as	they	are
for	the	benefit	of	others.	That	is	the	definition	of	truth.
Self-control	means	that	the	senses	should	not	be	used	for	unnecessary
personal	enjoyment.	There	is	no	prohibition	against	meeting	the	proper	needs
of	the	senses,	but	unnecessary	sense	enjoyment	is	detrimental	for	spiritual
advancement.	Therefore	the	senses	should	be	restrained	from	unnecessary	use.
Similarly,	the	mind	should	not	indulge	in	unnecessary	thoughts;	that	is	called
śamaḥ,	
or	calmness.	Nor	should	one	spend	one's	time	pondering	over	earning
money.	That	is	a	misuse	of	the	thinking	power.	The	mind	should	be	used	to
understand	the	prime	necessity	of	human	beings,	and	that	should	be	presented
authoritatively.	The	power	of	thought	should	be	developed	in	association	with
persons	who	are	authorities	in	the	scriptures,	saintly	persons	and	spiritual
masters	and	those	whose	thinking	is	highly	developed.	
Sukham,	
pleasure	or
happiness,	should	always	be	in	that	which	is	favorable	for	the	cultivation	of
the	spiritual	knowledge	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	And	similarly,	that	which	is
painful	or	which	causes	distress	is	that	which	is	unfavorable	for	the	cultivation
of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Anything	favorable	for	the	development	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	should	be	accepted,	and	anything	unfavorable	should	be
rejected.
Bhava,	
birth,	should	be	understood	to	refer	to	the	body.	As	far	as	the	soul	is
concerned,	there	is	neither	birth	nor	death;	that	we	have	discussed	in	the
beginning	of	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
Birth	and	death	apply	to	one's	embodiment	in	the
material	world.	Fear	is	due	to	worrying	about	the	future.	A	person	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	has	no	fear	because	by	his	activities	he	is	sure	to	go	back	to	the
spiritual	sky,	back	home,	back	to	Godhead.	Therefore	his	future	is	very	bright.
Others,	however,	do	not	know	what	their	future	holds;	they	have	no
knowledge	of	what	the	next	life	holds.	So	they	are	therefore	in	constantanxiety.	If	we	want	to	get	free	from	anxiety,	then	the	best	course	is	to
understand	Kṛṣṇa	and	be	situated	always	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	In	that	way
we	will	be	free	from	all	fear.	In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.	
it	is	stated	that	fear	is
caused	by	our	absorption	in	the	illusory	energy,	but	those	who	are	free	from
the	illusory	energy,	those	who	are	confident	that	they	are	not	the	material
body,	that	they	are	spiritual	parts	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	and
are	therefore	engaged	in	the	transcendental	service	of	the	Supreme	Godhead,
have	nothing	to	fear.	Their	future	is	very	bright.	This	fear	is	a	condition	of
persons	who	are	not	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	
Bhayam,	
fearlessness,	is	only
possible	for	one	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
Ahiṁsā,	
nonviolence,	means	that	one	should	not	do	anything	which	will	put
others	into	misery	or	confusion.	Material	activities	that	are	promised	by	so
many	politicians,	sociologists,	philanthropists,	etc.,	do	not	produce	very	good
results	because	the	politicians	and	philanthropists	have	no	transcendental
vision;	they	do	not	know	what	is	actually	beneficial	for	human	society.
Ahiṁsā	
means	that	people	should	be	trained	in	such	a	way	that	the	full
utilization	of	the	human	body	can	be	achieved.	The	human	body	is	meant	for
spiritual	realization,	so	any	movement	or	any	commissions	which	do	not
further	that	end	commit	violence	on	the	human	body.	That	which	furthers	the
future	spiritual	happiness	of	the	people	in	general	is	called	nonviolence.
Samatā,	
equanimity,	refers	to	freedom	from	attachment	and	aversion.	To	be
very	much	attached	or	to	be	very	much	detached	is	not	the	best.	This	material
world	should	be	accepted	without	attachment	or	aversion.	Similarly,	that
which	is	favorable	for	prosecuting	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	should	be	accepted;
that	which	is	unfavorable	should	be	rejected.	That	is	called	
samatā,
equanimity.	A	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	has	nothing	to	reject	and	nothing
to	accept	unless	it	is	useful	in	the	prosecution	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
Tuṣṭiḥ,	
satisfaction,	means	that	one	should	not	be	eager	to	gather	more	and
more	material	goods	by	unnecessary	activity.	One	should	be	satisfied	with
whatever	is	obtained	by	the	grace	of	the	Supreme	Lord;	that	is	called
satisfaction.	
Tapas	
means	austerity	or	penance.	There	are	many	rules	and
definitions	in	the	
Vedas	
which	apply	here,	like	rising	early	in	the	morning	and
taking	a	bath.	Sometimes	it	is	very	troublesome	to	rise	early	in	the	morning,
but	whatever	voluntary	trouble	one	may	suffer	in	this	way	is	called	penance.Similarly,	there	are	prescriptions	for	fasting	on	certain	days	of	the	month.	One
may	not	be	inclined	to	practice	such	fasting,	but	because	of	his	determination
to	make	advancement	in	the	science	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	he	should	accept
such	bodily	troubles	which	are	recommended.	However,	one	should	not	fast
unnecessarily	or	against	Vedic	injunctions.	One	should	not	fast	for	some
political	purpose;	that	is	described	in	
Bhagavad-gītā	
as	fasting	in	ignorance,
and	anything	done	in	ignorance	or	passion	does	not	lead	to	spiritual
advancement.	Everything	done	in	the	mode	of	goodness	does	advance	one,
however,	and	fasting	done	in	terms	of	the	Vedic	injunctions	enriches	one	in
spiritual	knowledge.
As	far	as	charity	is	concerned,	one	should	give	fifty	percent	of	his	earnings
to	some	good	cause.	And	what	is	a	good	cause?	It	is	that	which	is	conducted
in	terms	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	That	is	not	only	a	good	cause,	but	it	is	the
best	cause.	Because	Kṛṣṇa	is	good,	His	cause	is	also	good.	Thus	charity
should	be	given	to	a	person	who	is	engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
According	to	Vedic	literature,	it	is	enjoined	that	charity	should	be	given	to	the
brāhmaṇas.	
This	practice	is	still	followed,	although	not	very	nicely	in	terms	of
the	Vedic	injunction.	But	still	the	injunction	is	that	charity	should	be	given	to
the	
brāhmaṇas.	
Why?	Because	they	are	engaged	in	higher	cultivation	of
spiritual	knowledge.	A	
brāhmaṇa	
issupposed	to	devote	his	whole	life	to
understanding	Brahman.	A	
brahma-jana	
is	one	who	knows	Brahman;	he	is
called	a	
brāhmaṇa.	
Thus	charity	is	offered	to	the	
brāhmaṇas	
because	since
they	are	always	engaged	in	higher	spiritual	service,	they	have	no	time	to	earn
their	livelihood.	In	the	Vedic	literature,	charity	is	also	to	be	awarded	to	the
renouncer	of	life,	the	
sannyāsī.	
The	
sannyāsīs
	beg	from	door	to	door,	not	for
money	but	for	missionary	purposes.	The	system	is	that	they	go	from	door	to
door	to	awaken	the	householders	from	the	slumber	of	ignorance.	Because	the
householders	are	engaged	in	family	affairs	and	have	forgotten	their	actual
purpose	in	life
—
awakening	their	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness
—
it	is	the	business	of
the	
sannyāsīs
	to	go	as	beggars	to	the	householders	and	encourage	them	to	be
Kṛṣṇa	conscious.	As	it	is	said	in	the	
Vedas
,	one	should	awake	and	achieve
what	is	due	him	in	this	human	form	of	life.	This	knowledge	and	method	is
distributed	by	the	
sannyāsīs
;	hence	charity	is	to	be	given	to	the	renouncer	of
life,	to	the	
brāhmaṇas
,	and	similar	good	causes,	not	to	any	whimsical	cause.
Yaśaḥ
,	fame,	should	be	according	to	Lord	Caitanya,	who	said	that	a	man	is
famous	when	he	is	known	as	a	great	devotee.	That	is	real	fame.	If	one	has
become	a	great	man	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	it	is	known,	then	he	is	trulyfamous.	One	who	does	not	have	such	fame	is	infamous.
All	these	qualities	are	manifest	throughout	the	universe	in	human	society
and	in	the	society	of	the	demigods.	There	are	many	forms	of	humanity	on
other	planets,	and	these	qualities	are	there.	Now,	for	one	who	wants	to
advance	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	Kṛṣṇa	creates	all	these	qualities,	but	the
person	develops	them	himself	from	within.	One	who	engages	in	the
devotional	service	of	the	Supreme	Lord	develops	all	the	good	qualities,	as
arranged	by	the	Supreme	Lord.
Of	whatever	we	find,	good	or	bad,	the	origin	is	Kṛṣṇa.	Nothing	can
manifest	in	this	material	world	which	is	not	in	Kṛṣṇa.	That	is	knowledge;
although	we	know	that	things	are	differently	situated,	we	should	realize	that
everything	flows	from	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	6
म ह ष ᆼ य ः
	
स ᇴ त
	
प ू व ᆹ
	
च ᇰ व ा र ो
	
म न व ᇿ त थ ा
	
।
म द ् भ ा व ा
	
म ा न स ा ज ा त ा
	
य े ष ा ं
	
ल ो क
	
इ म ा ः
	
प ् र ज ा ः
	
॥
६
॥
maharṣayaḥ	sapta	pūrve
catvāro	manavas	tathā
mad-bhāvā	mānasā	jātā
yeṣāṁ	loka	imāḥ	prajāḥ
maharṣayaḥ—
the	great	sages;	
sapta—
seven;	
pūrve
—before;	
catvāraḥ
—
four;	
manavaḥ—
Manus;	
tathā—
also;	
mat-bhāvāḥ—
born	of	Me;	
mānasāḥ
—
from	the	mind;	
jātāḥ—
born;	
yeṣām
—of	them;	
loke—
the	planets;	
imāḥ
—all
this;	
prajāḥ—
population.
TRANSLATION
The	seven	great	sages	and	before	them	the	four	other	great	sages	and
the	Manus	[progenitors	of	mankind]	are	born	out	of	My	mind,	and	all
creatures	in	these	planets	descend	from	them.
PURPORTThe	Lord	is	giving	a	genealogical	synopsis	of	the	universal	population.
Brahmā	is	the	original	creature	born	out	of	the	energy	of	the	Supreme	Lord
known	as	Hiraṇyagarbha.	And	from	Brahmā	all	the	seven	great	sages,	and
before	them	four	other	great	sages,	named	Sanaka,	Sananda,	Sanātana,	and
Sanatkumāra,	and	the	fourteen	Manus,	are	manifest.	All	these	twenty-five
great	sages	are	known	as	the	patriarchs	of	the	living	entities	all	over	the
universe.	There	are	innumerable	universes	and	innumerable	planets	within
each	universe,	and	each	planet	is	full	of	population	of	different	varieties.	All
of	them	are	born	of	these	twenty-five	patriarchs.	Brahmā	underwent	penance
for	one	thousand	years	of	the	demigods	before	he	realized	by	the	grace	of
Kṛṣṇa	how	to	create.	Then	from	Brahmā,	Sanaka,	Sananda,	Sanātana,	and
Sanatkumāra	came	out,	then	Rudra,	andthen	the	seven	sages,	and	in	this	way
all	the	
brāhmaṇas	
and	
kṣatriyas	
are	born	out	of	the	energy	of	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.	Brahmā	is	known	as	
pitāmaha,	
the	grandfather,	and
Kṛṣṇa	is	known	as	the	
prapitā-maha,	
the	father	of	the	grandfather.	That	is
stated	in	the	Eleventh	Chapter	of	the	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
(Bg.	11.39)
TEXT	7
ए त ा ं
	
ि व भ ू ि त ं
	
य ो ग ं
	
च
	
म म
	
य ो
	
व े ि ሧ
	
त ᇰ ᇰ व त ः
	
।
स ो ऽ ि व क ᇸ प े न
	
य ो ग े न
	
य ु ᇬ य त े
	
न ा त ् र
	
स ं श य ः
	
॥
७
॥
etāṁ	vibhūtiṁ	yogaṁ	ca
mama	yo	vetti	tattvataḥ
so	'vikalpena	yogena
yujyate	nātra	saṁśayaḥ
etām—
all	this;	
vibhūtiṁ—
opulence;	
yogam	ca—
also	mystic	power;	
mama
—
of	Mine;	
yaḥ—
anyone;	
vetti—
knows;	
tattvataḥ—
factually;	
saḥ—
he;
avikalpena—
without	division;	
yogena—
in	devotional	service;	
yujyate
—
engaged;	
na—
never;	
atra—
here;	
saṁśayaḥ—
doubt.
TRANSLATION
He	who	knows	in	truth	this	glory	and	power	of	Mine	engages	in
unalloyed	devotional	service;	of	this	there	is	no	doubt.PURPORT
The	highest	summit	of	spiritual	perfection	is	knowledge	of	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.	Unless	one	is	firmly	convinced	of	the	different
opulences	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	he	cannot	engage	in	devotional	service.
Generally	people	know	that	God	is	great,	but	they	do	not	know	in	detail	how
God	is	great.	Here	are	the	details.	If	one	knows	factually	how	God	is	great,
then	naturally	he	becomes	a	surrendered	soul	and	engages	himself	in	the
devotional	service	of	the	Lord.	When	one	factually	knows	the	opulences	of	the
Supreme,	there	is	no	alternative	but	to	surrender	to	Him.	This	factual
knowledge	can	be	known	from	the	descriptions	in	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
and
Bhagavad-gītā	
and	similar	literatures.
In	the	administration	of	this	universe	there	are	many	demigods	distributed
throughout	the	planetary	system,	and	the	chief	of	them	are	Brahmā,	Lord	Śiva
and	the	four	great	Kumāras	and	other	patriarchs.	There	are	many	forefathers
of	the	population	of	the	universe,	and	all	of	them	are	born	of	the	Supreme
Lord	Kṛṣṇa.	The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	is	the	original
forefather	of	all	forefathers.
These	are	some	of	the	opulences	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	When	one	is	firmly
convinced	of	them,	he	accepts	Kṛṣṇa	with	great	faith	and	without	any	doubt,
and	he	engages	in	devotional	service.	All	this	particular	knowledge	is	required
in	order	to	increase	one's	interest	in	the	loving	devotional	service	of	the	Lord.
One	should	not	neglect	to	understand	fully	how	great	Kṛṣṇa	is,	for	by	knowing
the	greatness	of	Kṛṣṇa	one	will	be	able	to	be	fixed	in	sincere	devotional
service.
TEXT	8
अ ह ं
	
स व ᆼ ᇿ य
	
प ् र भ व ो
	
म ሧ ः
	
स व ᆾ
	
प ् र व त ᆼ त े
	
।
इ ि त
	
म ᇰ व ा
	
भ ज ᇳ त े
	
म ा ं
	
ब ु ध ा
	
भ ा व स म ि ᇳ व त ा ः
	
॥
८
॥
ahaṁ	sarvasya	prabhavo
mattaḥ	sarvaṁ	pravartate
iti	matvā	bhajante	māṁ
budhā	bhāva-samanvitāḥ
aham
—I;	
sarvasya
—of	all;	
prabhavaḥ
—source	of	generation;	
mattaḥ
—from	Me;	
sarvam
—everything;	
pravartate
—emanates;	
iti
—thus;	
matvā
—
knowing;	
bhajante—
becomes	devoted;	
mām
—unto	Me;	
budhāḥ—
learned;
bhāva-	samanvitāḥ
—with	great	attention.
TRANSLATION
I	am	the	source	of	all	spiritual	and	material	worlds.	Everything
emanates	from	Me.	The	wise	who	know	this	perfectly	engage	in	My
devotional	service	and	worship	Me	with	all	their	hearts.
PURPORT
A	learned	scholar	who	has	studied	the	
Vedas
	perfectly	and	has	information
from	authorities	like	Lord	Caitanya	and	who	knows	how	to	apply	these
teachings	can	understand	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	origin	of	everything	in	both	the
material	and	spiritual	worlds,	and	because	he	knows	this	perfectly	he	becomes
firmly	fixed	in	the	devotional	service	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	He	can	never	be
deviated	by	any	amount	of	nonsensical	commentaries	or	by	fools.	All	Vedic
literature	agrees	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	source	of	Brahmā,	Śiva	and	all	other
demigods.	In	the	
Atharva-veda
	it	is	said,	"yo	
brahmāṇaṁ	vidadhāti:	pūrvaṁ
yo	vai	vedāṁś
	
ca	gāpayati	sma	kṛṣṇaḥ."	
"It	was	Kṛṣṇa	who	in	the	beginning
instructed	Brahmā	in	Vedic	knowledge	and	who	disseminated	Vedic
knowledge	in	the	past."	Then	again	it	is	said,	
"atha	puruṣo	ha	vai	nārāyaṇo
'kāmayata	prajāḥ	sṛjeya	ity	upakramya."	
"Then	the	Supreme	Personality
Nārāyaṇa	desired	to	create	living	entities."	Again	it	is	said:
nārāyaṇād	brahmā	jāyate,	nārāyaṇād	prajāpatiḥ	prajāyate,	nārāyaṇād	indro
jāyate,	nārāyaṇād	aṣṭau	vasavo	jāyante,	nārāyaṇād	ekādaśa	rudrā	jāyante,
nārāyaṇād	dvādaśādityāḥ.
"From	Nārāyaṇa,	Brahmā	is	born,	and	from	Nārāyaṇa,	the	patriarchs	are
also	born.	From	Nārāyaṇa,	Indra	is	born,	from	Nārāyaṇa	the	eight	Vasus	are
born,	from	Nārāyaṇa	the	eleven	Rudras	are	born,	from	Nārāyaṇa	the	twelve
Ādityas	are	born."
It	is	said	in	the	same	
Vedas:	brahmaṇyo	devakī-putraḥ:	
"The	son	of	Devakī,
Kṛṣṇa,	is	the	Supreme	Personality."	Then	it	is	said:
eko	vai	nārāyaṇa	āsīn	na	brahmā	na	īśāno	nāpo	nāgni	samau	neme	dyāv-
āpṛthivī	na	nakṣatrāṇi	na	sūryaḥ	sa	ekākī	na	ramate	tasya	dhyānāntaḥ	sthasya
yatra	chāndogaiḥ	kriyamāṇāṣṭakādi-saṁjñakā	stuti-stomaḥ	stomam	ucyate."In	the	beginning	of	the	creation	there	was	only	the	Supreme	Personality
Nārāyaṇa.	There	was	no	Brahmā,	no	Śiva,	no	fire,	no	moon,	no	stars	in	the
sky,	no	sun.	There	was	only	Kṛṣṇa,	who	creates	all	and	enjoys	all."
In	the	many	
Purāṇas	
it	is	said	that	Lord	Śiva	was	born	from	the	highest,	the
Supreme	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	and	the	
Vedas	
say	that	it	is	the	Supreme	Lord,	the
creator	of	Brahmā	and	Śiva,	who	is	to	be	worshiped.	In	the	
Mokṣa-	dharma
Kṛṣṇa	also	says,
	prajāpatiṁ	ca	rudraṁ	cāpy	aham	eva	sṛjāmi	vai	tau	hi	māṁ
na	vijānīto	mama	māyā-vimohitau.	
"The	patriarchs,	Śiva	and	others	are
created	by	Me,	though	they	do	not	know	that	they	are	created	by	Me	because
they	are	deluded	by	My	illusory	energy."	In	
Varāha	Purāṇa	
it	is	also	said,
nārāyaṇaḥ	paro	devas	tasmāj	jātaś	caturmukhaḥ	tasmād	rudro	'bhavad	devaḥ
sa	ca	sarvajñatāṁ	gataḥ.	
"Nārāyaṇa	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
and	from	Him	Brahmā	was	born,	from	whom	Śiva	was	born."
Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	source	of	all	generations,	and	He	is	called	the	most
efficient	cause	of	everything.	He	says	that	because	"everything	is	born	of	Me,
I	am	the	original	source	of	all.	Everything	is	under	Me;	no	one	is	above	Me."
There	is	no	supreme	controller	other	than	Kṛṣṇa.	One	who	understands	Kṛṣṇa
in	such	a	way	from	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master	and	from	Vedic	literature,	who
engages	all	his	energy	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	becomes	a	truly	learned	man.
In	comparison	to	him,	all	others,	who	do	not	know	Kṛṣṇa	properly,	are	but
fools.	Only	a	fool	would	consider	Kṛṣṇa	to	be	an	ordinary	man.	A	Kṛṣṇa
conscious	person	should	not	be	bewildered	by	fools;	he	should	avoid	all
unauthorized	commentaries	and	interpretations	on	
Bhagavad-gītā	
and	proceed
in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	with	determination	and	firmness.
TEXT	9
म ि ᇫ च ሧ ा
	
म द ् ग त प ् र ा ण ा
	
ब ो ध य ᇳ त ः
	
प र ᇿ प र म ्
	
।
क थ य ᇳ त ᇽ च
	
म ा ं
	
ि न ᇰ य ं
	
त ु ᇾ य ि ᇳ त
	
च
	
र म ि ᇳ त
	
च
	
॥
९
॥
mac-cittā	mad-gata-prāṇā
bodhayantaḥ	parasparam
kathayantaś	ca	māṁ	nityaṁ
tuṣyanti	ca	ramanti	ca
mat-cittāḥ—
minds	fully	engaged	in	Me;	
mat-gata-prāṇāḥ—
lives	devoted	to
the	service	of	Kṛṣṇa;	
bodhayantaḥ—
preaching;	
parasparam—
amongthemselves;	
kathayantaḥ	ca—
talking	also;	
mām—
about	Me;	
nityam—
perpetually;	
tuṣyanti—
are	pleased;	
ca—
also;	
ramanti—
enjoy	transcendental
bliss;	
ca—
also
.
TRANSLATION
The	thoughts	of	My	pure	devotees	dwell	in	Me,	their	lives	are
surrendered	to	Me,	and	they	derive	great	satisfaction	and	bliss
enlightening	one	another	and	conversing	about	Me.
PURPORT
Pure	devotees,	whose	characteristics	are	mentioned	here,	engage
themselves	fully	in	the	transcendental	loving	service	of	the	Lord.	Their	minds
cannot	be	diverted	from	the	lotus	feet	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Their	talks	are	solely	on	the
transcendental	subjects.	The	symptoms	of	the	pure	devotees	are	described	in
this	verse	specifically.	Devotees	of	the	Supreme	Lord	are	twenty-four	hours
daily	engaged	in	glorifying	the	pastimes	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	Their	hearts
and	souls	are	constantly	submerged	in	Kṛṣṇa,	and	they	take	pleasure	in
discussing	Him	with	other	devotees.
In	the	preliminary	stage	of	devotional	service	they	relish	the	transcendental
pleasure	from	the	service	itself,	and	in	the	mature	stage	they	are	actually
situated	in	love	of	God.	Once	situated	in	that	transcendental	position,	they	can
relish	the	highest	perfection	which	is	exhibited	by	the	Lord	in	His	abode.	Lord
Caitanya	likens	transcendental	devotional	service	to	the	sowing	of	a	seed	in
the	heart	of	the	living	entity.	There	are	innumerable	living	entities	traveling
throughout	the	different	planets	of	the	universe,	and	out	of	them	there	are	a
few	who	are	fortunate	enough	to	meet	a	pure	devotee	and	get	the	chance	to
understand	devotional	service.	This	devotional	service	is	just	like	a	seed,	and
if	it	is	sown	in	the	heart	of	a	living	entity,	and	if	he	goes	on	hearing	and
chanting,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/	Hare	Rāma,	Hare
Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,	Hare	Hare,	that	seed	fructifies,	just	as	the	seed	of	a	tree
fructifies	with	regular	watering.	The	spiritual	plant	of	devotional	service
gradually	grows	and	grows	until	it	penetrates	the	covering	of	the	material
universe	and	enters	into	the	
brahmajyoti	
effulgence	in	the	spiritual	sky.	In	the
spiritual	sky	also	that	plant	grows	more	and	more	until	it	reaches	the	highest
planet,	which	is	called	Goloka	Vṛndāvana,	the	supreme	planet	of	Kṛṣṇa.Ultimately,	the	plant	takes	shelter	under	the	lotus	feet	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	rests	there.
Gradually,	as	a	plant	grows	fruits	and	flowers,	that	plant	of	devotional	service
also	produces	fruits,	and	the	watering	process	in	the	form	of	chanting	and
hearing	goes	on.	This	plant	of	devotional	service	is	fully	described	in	the
Caitanya-caritāmṛta.	
It	is	explained	there	that	when	the	complete	plant	takes
shelter	under	the	lotus	feet	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	one	becomes	fully	absorbed
in	love	of	God;	then	he	cannot	live	even	for	a	moment	without	being	in
contact	with	the	Supreme	Lord,	just	as	a	fish	cannot	live	without	water.	In
such	a	state,	the	devotee	actually	attains	the	transcendental	qualities	in	contact
with	the	Supreme	Lord.
The	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
is	also	full	of	such	narration	about	the	relationship
between	the	Supreme	Lord	and	His	devotees;	therefore	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam	
isvery	dear	to	the	devotees.	In	this	narration	there	is	nothing
about	material	activities,	sense	gratification	or	liberation.	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
is	the	only	narration	in	which	the	transcendental	nature	of	the	Supreme	Lord
and	His	devotees	is	fully	described.	Thus	the	realized	souls	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	take	continual	pleasure	in	hearing	such	transcendental
literatures,	just	as	a	young	boy	and	girl	take	pleasure	in	association.
TEXT	10
त े ष ा ं
	
स त त य ु ᇧ त ा न ा ं
	
भ ज त ा ं
	
प ् र ी ि त प ू व ᆼ क म ्
	
।
द द ा ि म
	
ब ु द ् ि ध य ो ग ं
	
त ं
	
य े न
	
म ा म ु प य ा ि ᇳ त
	
त े
	
॥
१ ०
॥
teṣāṁ	satata-yuktānāṁ
bhajatāṁ	prīti-pūrvakam
dadāmi	buddhi-yogaṁ	taṁ
yena	mām	upayānti	te
teṣām—
unto	them;	
satata-yuktānām—
always	engaged;	
bhajatām—
in
devotional	service;	
prīti-pūrvakam—
in	loving	ecstasy;	
dadāmi—
I	give;
buddhi-yogam—
real	intelligence;	
tam—
that;	
yena—
by	which;	
mām—
unto	Me;
upayānti
—
come;	
te
—they.
TRANSLATION
To	those	who	are	constantly	devoted	and	worship	Me	with	love,	I	givethe	understanding	by	which	they	can	come	to	Me.
PURPORT
In	this	verse	the	word	
buddhi-yogam	
is	very	significant.	We	may	remember
that	in	the	Second	Chapter	the	Lord,	instructing	Arjuna,	said	that	He	had
spoken	to	him	of	many	things	and	that	He	would	instruct	him	in	the	way	of
buddhi-yoga.	
Now	
buddhi-yoga	
is	explained.	
Buddhi-yogam	
itself	is	action	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness;	that	is	the	highest	intelligence.	
Buddhi	
means
intelligence,	and	
yogam	
means	mystic	activities	or	mystic	elevation.	When
one	tries	to	go	back	home,	back	to	Godhead,	and	takes	fully	to	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	in	devotional	service,	his	action	is	called	
buddhi-yogam.	
In
other	words,	
buddhi-yogam	
is	the	process	by	which	one	gets	out	of	the
entanglement	of	this	material	world.	The	ultimate	goal	of	progress	is	Kṛṣṇa.
People	do	not	know	this;	therefore	the	association	of	devotees	and	a	bona	fide
spiritual	master	are	important.	One	should	know	that	the	goal	is	Kṛṣṇa,	and
when	the	goal	is	assigned,	then	the	path	is	slowly	but	progressively	traversed,
and	the	ultimate	goal	is	achieved.
When	a	person	knows	the	goal	of	life	but	is	addicted	to	the	fruits	of
activities,	he	is	acting	in	
karma-yoga.	
When	he	knows	that	the	goal	is	Kṛṣṇa,
but	he	takes	pleasure	in	mental	speculations	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa,	he	is	acting
in	
jñāna-yoga.	
And	when	he	knows	the	goal	and	seeks	Kṛṣṇa	completely	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	devotional	service,	he	is	acting	in	
bhakti-yoga,	
or
buddhi-yoga,	
which	is	the	complete	
yoga.	
This	complete	
yoga	
is	the	highest
perfectional	stage	of	life.
A	person	may	have	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master	and	may	be	attached	to	a
spiritual	organization,	but	still,	if	he	is	not	intelligent	enough	to	make
progress,	then	Kṛṣṇa	from	within	gives	him	instructions	so	that	he	may
ultimately	come	to	Him	without	difficulty.	The	qualification	is	that	a	person
always	engage	himself	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	with	love	and	devotion
render	all	kinds	of	services.	He	should	perform	some	sort	of	work	for	Kṛṣṇa,
and	that	work	should	be	with	love.	If	a	devotee	is	intelligent	enough,	he	will
make	progress	on	the	path	of	self-realization.	If	one	is	sincere	and	devoted	to
the	activities	of	devotional	service,	the	Lord	gives	him	a	chance	to	make
progress	and	ultimately	attain	to	Him.
TEXT	11त े ष ा म े व ा न ु क ᇸ प ा थ ᆼ म ह म ᇥ ा न ज ं
	
त म ः
	
।
न ा श य ा ᇸ य ा ᇰ म भ ा व ᇿ थ ो
	
ᇥ ा न द ी प े न
	
भ ा ᇿ व त ा
	
॥
१ १
॥
teṣām	evānukampārtham
aham	ajñāna-jaṁ	tamaḥ
nāśayāmy	ātma-bhāvastho
jñāna-dīpena	bhāsvatā
teṣām
—for	them;	
eva
—certainly;	
anukampā-artham—
to	show	special
mercy;	
aham—
I;
	ajñāna-jam—
due	to	ignorance;	
tamaḥ—
darkness;	
nāśayāmi
—
dispel;	
ātma—
within;	
bhāvasthaḥ—
themselves;	
jñāna—
of	knowledge;
dīpena—
with	the	lamp;	
bhāsvatā—
glowing.
TRANSLATION
Out	of	compassion	for	them,	I,	dwelling	in	their	hearts,	destroy	with	the
shining	lamp	of	knowledge	the	darkness	born	of	ignorance.
PURPORT
When	Lord	Caitanya	was	in	Benares	promulgating	the	chanting	of	Hare
Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/	Hare	Rāma,	Hare	Rāma,	Rāma
Rāma,	Hare	Hare,	thousands	of	people	were	following	Him.	Prakāśānanda,	a
very	influential	and	learned	scholar	in	Benares	at	that	time,	derided	Lord
Caitanya	for	being	a	sentimentalist.	Sometimes	philosophers	criticize	the
devotees	because	they	think	that	most	of	the	devotees	are	in	the	darkness	of
ignorance	and	are	philosophically	naive	sentimentalists.	Actually	that	is	not
the	fact.	There	are	very,	very	learned	scholars	who	have	put	forward	the
philosophy	of	devotion,	but	even	if	a	devotee	does	not	take	advantage	of	their
literatures	or	of	his	spiritual	master,	if	he	is	sincere	in	his	devotional	service	he
is	helped	by	Kṛṣṇa	Himself	within	his	heart.	So	the	sincere	devotee	engaged	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	cannot	be	without	knowledge.	The	only	qualification	is
that	one	carry	out	devotional	service	in	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
The	modern	philosophers	think	that	without	discriminating	one	cannot	have
pure	knowledge.	For	them	this	answer	is	given	by	the	Supreme	Lord:	those
who	are	engaged	in	pure	devotional	service,	even	though	they	be	without
sufficient	education	and	even	without	sufficient	knowledge	of	the	Vedicprinciples,	are	still	helped	by	the	Supreme	God,	as	stated	in	this	verse.
The	Lord	tells	Arjuna	that	basically	there	is	no	possibility	of	understanding
the	Supreme	Truth,	the	Absolute	Truth,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
simply	by	speculating,	for	the	Supreme	Truth	is	so	great	that	it	is	not	possible
to	understand	Him	or	to	achieve	Him	simply	by	making	a	mental	effort.	Man
can	go	on	speculating	for	several	millions	of	years,	and	if	he	is	not	devoted,	if
he	is	not	a	lover	of	the	Supreme	Truth,	he	will	never	understand	Kṛṣṇa	or	the
Supreme	Truth.	Only	by	devotional	service	is	the	Supreme	Truth,	Kṛṣṇa,
pleased,	and	by	His	inconceivable	energy	He	can	reveal	Himself	to	the	heart
of	the	pure	devotee.	The	pure	devotee	always	has	Kṛṣṇa	within	his	heart;
therefore	he	is	just	like	the	sun	that	dissipates	the	darkness	of	ignorance.	This
is	the	special	mercy	rendered	to	the	pure	devotee	by	Kṛṣṇa.
Due	to	the	contamination	of	material	association,	through	many,	many
millions	of	births,	one's	heart	is	always	covered	with	the	dust	of	materialism,
but	when	one	engages	in	devotional	service	and	constantly	chants	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,
the	dust	quickly	clears,	and	one	is	elevated	to	the	platform	of	pure	knowledge.
The	ultimate	goal	of	Viṣṇu	can	be	attained	only	by	this	chant	and	by
devotional	service,	and	not	by	mental	speculation	or	argument.	The	pure
devotee	does	not	have	to	worry	about	the	necessities	of	life;	he	need	not	be
anxious	because	when	he	removes	the	darkness	from	his	heart,	everything	is
provided	automatically	by	the	Supreme	Lord,	for	He	is	pleased	by	the	loving
devotional	service	of	the	devotee.	This	is	the	essence	of	the	
Gītā's	
teachings.
By	studying	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
one	can	become	a	completely	surrendered	soul	to
the	Supreme	Lord	and	engage	himself	in	pure	devotional	service.	As	the	Lord
takes	charge,	one	becomes	completely	free	from	all	kinds	of	materialistic
endeavors.
TEXTS	12-13
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
	
प र ं
	
ब ् र ቊ ा
	
प र ं
	
ध ा म
	
प ि व त ् र ं
	
भ व ा न ्
	
।
	
प ु ኄ ष ं
	
श ा ᇽ व त ं
	
ि द ᇼ य म ा ि द द े व म ज ं
	
ि व भ ु म ्
	
॥
१ २
॥
	
आ ह ु ᇿ ᇰ व ा म ् र ष य ः
	
स व ᆹ
	
द े व ि ष ᆼ न ा र द ᇿ ᇰ थ ा
	
।
	
अ ि स त ो
	
द े व ल ो
	
ᇼ य ा स ः
	
ᇿ ᇼ य ं
	
च ै व
	
ब ् र व ी ि ष
	
म े
	
॥
१ ३
॥
arjuna	uvāca
paraṁ	brahma	paraṁ	dhāma
pavitraṁ	paramaṁ	bhavānpuruṣaṁ	śāśvataṁ	divyam
ādi-devam	ajaṁ	vibhum
āhus	tvām	ṛṣayaḥ	sarve
devarṣir	nāradas	tathā
asito	devalo	vyāsaḥ
svayaṁ	caiva	bravīṣi	me
arjunaḥ	uvāca
—Arjuna	said;	
param
—supreme;	
brahma—
truth;	
param
—
supreme;
	dhāma—
sustenance;
	pavitram—
purest;	
paramam
—supreme;
bhavān	—
Yourself;	
puruṣam
—personality;	
śāśvatam
—original;	
divyam
—
transcendental;	
ādi-devam—
original	Lord;	
ajam—
unborn;	
vibhum
—
greatest;	
āhuḥ—	
say;	
tvām
—unto	You;	
ṛṣayaḥ
—sages;	
sarve
—all;	
devarṣiḥ
—
the	sage	among	the	demigods;	
nāradaḥ
—Nārada;	
tathā
—also;	
asitaḥ
—
Asita;	
devalaḥ—
Devala;	
vyāsaḥ—
Vyāsa;
	svayam
—personally;	
ca
—also;	
eva
—certainly;	
bravīṣi—
explaining;	
me
—unto	me.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	said:	You	are	the	Supreme	Brahman,	the	ultimate,	the	supreme
abode	and	purifier,	the	Absolute	Truth	and	the	eternal	divine	person.	You
are	the	primal	God,	transcendental	and	original,	and	You	are	the	unborn
and	all-pervading	beauty.	All	the	great	sages	such	as	Nārada,	Asita,
Devala,	and	Vyāsa	proclaim	this	of	You,	and	now	You	Yourself	are
declaring	it	to	me.
PURPORT
In	these	two	verses	the	Supreme	Lord	gives	a	chance	to	the	modern
philosopher,	for	here	it	is	clear	that	the	Supreme	is	different	from	the
individual	soul.	Arjuna,	after	hearing	the	essential	four	verses	of	
Bhagavad-
gītā
	in	this	chapter,	became	completely	free	from	all	doubts	and	accepted
Kṛṣṇa	as	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	He	at	once	boldly	declares,
"You	are	Parambrahma,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead."	And
previously	Kṛṣṇa	states	that	He	is	the	originator	of	everything	and	everyone.
Every	demigod	and	every	human	being	is	dependent	on	Him.	Men	and
demigods,	out	of	ignorance,	think	that	they	are	absolute	and	independent	of
the	Supreme	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.	That	ignorance	is	removed	perfectly	by	thedischarge	of	devotional	service.	This	is	already	explained	in	the	previous	verse
by	the	Lord.	Now	by	His	grace,	Arjuna	is	accepting	Him	as	the	Supreme
Truth,	in	concordance	with	the	Vedic	injunction.	It	is	not	because	Kṛṣṇa	is	an
intimate	friend	of	Arjuna	that	he	is	flattering	Him	by	calling	Him	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	the	Absolute	Truth.	Whatever	Arjuna	says	in	these
two	verses	is	confirmed	by	Vedic	truth.	Vedic	injunctions	affirm	that	only	one
who	takes	to	devotional	service	to	the	Supreme	Lord	can	understand	Him,
whereas	others	cannot.	Each	and	every	word	of	this	verse	spoken	by	Arjuna	is
confirmed	by	Vedic	injunction.
In	the	
Kena	Upaniṣad	
it	is	stated	that	the	Supreme	Brahman	is	the	rest	for
everything,	and	Kṛṣṇa	has	already	explained	that	everything	is	resting	on	Him.
The	
Muṇḍaka	Upaniṣad	
confirms	that	the	Supreme	Lord,	in	whom	everything
is	resting,	can	be	realized	only	by	those	who	engage	constantly	in	thinking	of
Him.	This	constant	thinking	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	
smaraṇam,	
one	of	the	methods	of
devotional	service.	It	is	only	by	devotional	service	to	Kṛṣṇa	that	one	can
understand	his	position	and	get	rid	of	this	material	body.
In	the	
Vedas	
the	Supreme	Lord	is	accepted	as	the	purest	of	the	pure.	One
who	understands	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	purest	of	the	pure	can	become	purified	from
all	sinful	activities.	One	cannot	be	disinfected	from	sinful	activities	unless	he
surrenders	unto	the	Supreme	Lord.	Arjuna's	acceptance	of	Kṛṣṇa	as	the
supreme	pure	complies	with	the	injunctions	of	Vedic	literature.	This	is	also
confirmed	by	great	personalities,	of	whom	Nārada	is	the	chief.
Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	and	one	should	always
meditate	upon	Him	and	enjoy	one's	transcendental	relationship	with	Him.	He
is	the	supreme	existence.	He	is	free	from	bodily	needs,	birth	and	death.	Not
only	does	Arjuna	confirm	this,	but	all	the	Vedic	literatures,	the	
Purāṇas	
and
histories.	In	all	Vedic	literatures	Kṛṣṇa	is	thus	described,	and	the	Supreme
Lord	Himself	also	says	in	the	Fourth	Chapter,	"Although	I	am	unborn,	I
appear	on	this	earth	to	establish	religious	principles."	He	is	the	supreme
origin;	He	has	no	cause,	for	He	is	the	cause	of	all	causes,	and	everything	is
emanating	from	Him.	This	perfect	knowledge	can	be	had	by	the	grace	of	the
Supreme	Lord.
Here	Arjuna	expresses	himself	through	the	grace	of	Kṛṣṇa.	If	we	want	to
understand	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
we	should	accept	the	statements	in	these	two
verses.	This	is	called	the	
paramparā	
system,	acceptance	of	the	disciplic
succession.	Unless	one	is	in	the	disciplic	succession,	he	cannot	understand
Bhagavad-gītā.	
It	is	not	possible	by	so-called	academic	education.
Unfortunately	those	proud	of	their	academic	education,	despite	so	muchevidence	in	Vedic	literatures,	stick	to	their	obstinate	conviction	that	Kṛṣṇa	is
an	ordinary	person.
TEXT	14
स व ᆼ म े त द ृ त ं
	
म ᇳ य े
	
य ᇳ म ा ं
	
व द ि स
	
क े श व
	
।
न
	
ि ह
	
त े
	
भ ग व ᇳ ᇼ य ि ᇧ त ं
	
ि व द ु द ᆹ व ा
	
न
	
द ा न व ा ः
	
॥
१ ४
॥
sarvam	etad	ṛtaṁ	manye
yan	māṁ	vadasi	keśava
na	hi	te	bhagavan	vyaktiṁ
vidur	devā	na	dānavāḥ
sarvam—
all;	
etat—
these;	
ṛtam—
truths;	
manye—
accept;	
yat
—which;	
mām—
unto	me;	
vadasi—
You	tell;	
keśava
—O	Kṛṣṇa;	
na—
never;	
hi—
certainly;	
te
—
Your;	
bhagavan
—O	Personality	of	Godhead;	
vyaktim—
revelation;	
viduḥ—
can	know;	
devaḥ—
the	demigods;	
na—
nor;	
dānavāḥ—
the	demons.
TRANSLATION
O	Kṛṣṇa,	I	totally	accept	as	truth	all	that	You	have	told	me.	Neither	the
gods	nor	demons,	O	Lord,	know	Thy	personality.
PURPORT
Arjuna	herein	confirms	that	persons	of	faithless	and	demonic	nature	cannot
understand	Kṛṣṇa.	He	is	not	even	known	by	the	demigods,	so	what	to	speak	of
the	so-called	scholars	of	this	modern	world?	By	the	grace	of	the	Supreme
Lord,	Arjuna	has	understood	that	the	Supreme	Truth	is	Kṛṣṇa	and	that	He	is
the	perfect	one.	One	should	therefore	follow	the	path	of	Arjuna.	He	received
the	authority	of	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
As	described	in	the	Fourth	Chapter,	the
paramparā	
system	of	disciplic	succession	for	the	understanding	of	
Bhagavad-
gītā	
was	lost,	and	therefore	Kṛṣṇa	reestablished	that	disciplic	succession	with
Arjuna	because	He	considered	Arjuna	His	intimate	friend	and	a	great	devotee.
Therefore,	as	stated	in	our	Introduction	to	
Gītopaniṣad,	Bhagavad-gītā	
should
be	understood	in	the	
paramparā	
system.	When	the	
paramparā	
system	waslost,	Arjuna	was	again	selected	to	rejuvenate	it.	The	acceptance	of	Arjuna	of
all	that	Kṛṣṇa	says	should	be	emulated;	then	we	can	understand	the	essence	of
Bhagavad-gītā,	
and	then	only	can	we	understand	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.
TEXT	15
ᇿ व य म े व ा ᇰ म न ा ᇰ म ा न ं
	
व े ᇰ थ
	
ᇰ व ं
	
प ु ኄ ष ो ሧ म
	
।
भ ू त भ ा व न
	
भ ू त े श
	
द े व द े व
	
ज ग ᇰ प त े
	
॥
१ ५
॥
svayam	evātmanātmānaṁ
vettha	tvaṁ	puruṣottama
bhūta-bhāvana	bhūteśa
deva-deva	jagat-pate
svayam
—personality;	
eva—
certainly;	
ātmanā—
by	Yourself;	
ātmānam
—
Yourself;	
vettha—
know;	
tvam—
You;
	puruṣottama
—O	greatest	of	all
persons;	
bhūta-bhāvana
—O	origin	of	everything;	
bhūteśa
—O	Lord	of
everything;	
deva-deva
—O	Lord	of	all	demigods;	
jagat-pate
—O	Lord	of	the
entire	universe.
TRANSLATION
Indeed,	You	alone	know	Yourself	by	Your	own	potencies,	O	origin	of
all,	Lord	of	all	beings,	God	of	gods,	O	Supreme	Person,	Lord	of	the
universe!
PURPORT
The	Supreme	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	can	be	known	by	persons	who	are	in	a
relationship	with	Him	through	the	discharge	of	devotional	service,	like	Arjuna
and	his	successors.	Persons	of	demonic	or	atheistic	mentality	cannot	know
Kṛṣṇa.	Mental	speculation	that	leads	one	away	from	the	Supreme	Lord	is	a
serious	sin,	and	one	who	does	not	know	Kṛṣṇa	should	not	try	to	comment	on
Bhagavad-gītā.	Bhagavad-gītā	
is	the	statement	of	Kṛṣṇa,	and	since	it	is	the
science	of	Kṛṣṇa,	it	should	be	understood	from	Kṛṣṇa	as	Arjuna	understood	it.It	should	not	be	received	from	atheistic	persons.
The	Supreme	Truth	is	realized	in	three	aspects:	as	impersonal	Brahman,
localized	Paramātmā	and	at	last	as	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	So	at
the	last	stage	of	understanding	the	Absolute	Truth,	one	comes	to	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.	A	liberated	man	and	even	a	common	man	may	realize
impersonal	Brahman	or	localized	Paramātmā,	yet	they	may	not	understand
God's	personality	from	the	verses	of	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
which	are	being	spoken
by	this	person,	Kṛṣṇa.	Sometimes	the	impersonalists	accept	Kṛṣṇa	as
Bhagavan,	or	they	accept	His	authority.	Yet	many	liberated	persons	cannot
understand	Kṛṣṇa	as	Puruṣottama,	the	Supreme	Person,	the	father	of	all	living
entities.	Therefore	Arjuna	addresses	Him	as	Puruṣottama.	And	if	one	comes	to
know	Him	as	the	father	of	all	the	living	entities,	still	one	may	not	know	Him
as	the	supreme	controller;	therefore	He	is	addressed	here	as	Bhūteśa,	the
supreme	controller	of	everyone.	And	even	if	one	knows	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	supreme
controller	of	all	living	entities,	still	one	may	not	know	that	He	is	the	origin	of
all	the	demigods;	therefore	He	is	addressed	herein	as	Devadeva,	the
worshipful	God	of	all	demigods.	And	even	if	one	knows	Him	as	the
worshipful	God	of	all	demigods,	one	may	not	know	that	He	is	the	supreme
proprietor	of	everything;	therefore	He	is	addressed	as	Jagatpati.	Thus	the	truth
about	Kṛṣṇa	is	established	in	this	verse	by	the	realization	of	Arjuna,	and	we
should	follow	in	the	footsteps	of	Arjuna	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa	as	He	is.
TEXT	16
व ᇧ त ु म ह ᆼ ᇿ य श े ष े ण
	
ि द ᇼ य ा
	
ቋ ा ᇰ म ि व भ ू त य ः
	
।
य ा ि भ ि व ᆼ भ ू ि त ि भ ल ो ᆼ क ा ि न म ा ं ᇿ ᇰ व ं
	
ᇼ य ा ᇴ य
	
ि त ᇾ ठ ि स
	
॥
१ ६
॥
vaktum	arhasy	aśeṣeṇa
divyā	hy	ātma-vibhūtayaḥ
yābhir	vibhūtibhir	lokān
imāṁs	tvaṁ	vyāpya	tiṣṭhasi
vaktum—
to	say;	
arhasi—
deserve;	
aśeṣeṇa—
in	detail;	
divyā—
divine;	
hi—
certainly;	
ātma—
Yourself;	
vibhūtayaḥ—
opulences;	
yābhiḥ—
by	which;
vibhūtibhiḥ
—opulences;	
lokān—
all	the	planets;	
imān—
these;	
tvam—
You;
vyāpya—
pervading;	
tiṣṭhasi—
remain.TRANSLATION
Please	tell	me	in	detail	of	Your	divine	powers	by	which	You	pervade	all
these	worlds	and	abide	in	them.
PURPORT
In	this	verse	it	appears	that	Arjuna	is	already	satisfied	with	his
understanding	of	the	Supreme	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.	By	Kṛṣṇa's	grace,	Arjuna	has
personal	experience,	intelligence	and	knowledge	and	whatever	else	a	person
may	have	through	all	these	agencies,	and	he	has	understood	Kṛṣṇa	as	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	For	him	there	is	no	doubt,	Yet	he	is	asking
Kṛṣṇa	to	explain	His	all-pervading	nature	so	that	in	the	future	people	will
understand,	especially	the	impersonalists,	how	He	exists	in	His	all-pervading
aspect	through	His	different	energies.	One	should	know	that	this	is	being
asked	by	Arjuna	on	behalf	of	the	common	people.
TEXT	17
क थ ं
	
ि व ሱ ा म ह ं
	
य ो ि ग ं ᇿ ᇰ व ा ं
	
स द ा
	
प ि र ि च ᇳ त य न ्
	
।
क े ष ु
	
क े ष ु
	
च
	
भ ा व े ष ु
	
ि च ᇳ ᇰ य ो ऽ ि स
	
भ ग व ᇳ म य ा
	
॥
१ ७
॥
kathaṁ	vidyām	ahaṁ	yogiṁs
tvāṁ	sadā	paricintayan
keṣu	keṣu	ca	bhāveṣu
cintyo	'si	bhagavan	mayā
katham—
how;	
vidyām	aham—
shall	I	know;	
yogin
—O	supreme	mystic;
tvām—
You;
	sadā—
always;	
paricintayan—
thinking;	
keṣu—
in	which;	
keṣu—	
in
which;	
ca—
also;	
bhāveṣu—
nature;	
cintyaḥ	asi—
You	are	remembered;
bhagavan
—O	Supreme;	
mayā—
by	me.
TRANSLATION
How	should	I	meditate	on	You?	In	what	various	forms	are	You	to	becontemplated,	O	Blessed	Lord?
PURPORT
As	it	is	stated	in	the	previous	chapter,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead
is	covered	by	His	
yoga-māyā.	
Only	surrendered	souls	and	devotees	can	see
Him.	Now	Arjuna	is	convinced	that	His	friend,	Kṛṣṇa,	is	the	Supreme
Godhead,	but	he	wants	to	know	the	general	process	by	which	the	all-
pervading	Lord	can	be	understood	by	the	common	man.	No	common	man,
including	the	demons	and	atheists,	can	know	Kṛṣṇa	because	He	is	guarded	by
His	
yoga-māyā	
energy.	Again,	these	questions	are	asked	by	Arjuna	for	their
benefit.	The	superior	devotee	is	not	only	concerned	for	his	own	understanding,
but	for	the	understanding	of	all	mankind.	Out	of	his	mercy,	because	he	is	a
Vaiṣṇava,	a	devotee,	Arjuna	is	opening	the	understanding	for	the	common
man	as	far	as	the	all-pervasiveness	of	the	Supreme	is	concerned.	He	addresses
Kṛṣṇa	specifically	as	
yogin	
because	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	master	of	the	
yoga-māyā
energy	by	which	He	is	covered	and	uncovered	to	the	common	man.	The
common	man	who	has	no	love	for	Kṛṣṇa	cannot	always	think	of	Kṛṣṇa;
therefore	he	has	to	think	materially.	Arjuna	is	considering	the	mode	of
thinking	of	the	materialistic	persons	of	this	world.	Because	materialists	cannot
understand	Kṛṣṇa	spiritually,	they	are	advised	to	concentrate	the	mind	on
physical	things	and	try	to	see	how	Kṛṣṇa	is	manifested	by	physical
representations.
TEXT	18
ि व ᇿ त र े ण ा ᇰ म न ो
	
य ो ग ं
	
ि व भ ू ि त ं
	
च
	
ज न ा द ᆼ न
	
।
भ ू य ः
	
क थ य
	
त ृ ि ᇴ त ि ह ᆼ
	
श ृ ᇯ व त ो
	
न ा ि ᇿ त
	
म े ऽ म ृ त म ्
	
॥
१ ८
॥
vistareṇātmano	yogaṁ
vibhūtiṁ	ca	janārdana
bhūyaḥ	kathaya	tṛptir	hi
śṛṇvato	nāsti	me	'mṛtam
vistareṇa—
in	description;	
ātmanaḥ—
of	Yourself;	
yogam—
mystic	power;
vibhūtim—
opulences;	
ca—
also;	
janārdana
—O	killer	of	the	atheists;	
bhūyaḥ
—
again;	
kathaya—
describe;	
tṛptiḥ—
satisfaction;	
hi—
certainly;	
śṛṇvataḥ—
hearing;	
na	asti—
there	is	no;	
me—
my;	
amṛtam—
nectar.
TRANSLATION
Tell	me	again	in	detail,	O	Janārdana	[Kṛṣṇa],	of	Your	mighty	potencies
and	glories,	for	I	never	tire	of	hearing	Your	ambrosial	words.
PURPORT
A	similar	statement	was	made	to	Sūta	Gosvāmī	by	the	
ṛṣis	
of	Naimiṣāraṇya,
headed	by	Śaunaka.	That	statement	is:
vayaṁ	tu	na	vitṛpyāma	uttama-śloka-vikrame
yac	chṛṇvatāṁ	rasa-jñānāṁ	svādu	svādu	pade	pade.
"One	can	never	be	satiated	even	though	one	continuously	hears	the
transcendental	pastimes	of	Kṛṣṇa,	who	is	glorified	by	Vedic	hymns.	Those
who	have	entered	into	a	transcendental	relationship	with	Kṛṣṇa	relish	in	every
step	descriptions	of	the	pastimes	of	the	Lord."	Thus	Arjuna	is	interested	to
hear	about	Kṛṣṇa,	specifically	how	He	remains	as	the	all-pervading	Supreme
Lord.
Now	as	far	as	
amṛtam
,	nectar,	is	concerned,	any	narration	or	statement
concerning	Kṛṣṇa	is	just	like	nectar.	And	this	nectar	can	be	perceived	by
practical	experience.	Modern	stories,	fiction	and	histories	are	different	from
the	transcendental	pastimes	of	the	Lord	in	that	one	will	tire	of	hearing
mundane	stories,	but	one	never	tires	of	hearing	about	Kṛṣṇa.	It	is	for	this
reason	only	that	the	history	of	the	whole	universe	is	replete	with	references	to
the	pastimes	of	the	incarnations	of	Godhead.	For	instance,	the	
Purāṇas	
are
histories	of	bygone	ages	that	relate	the	pastimes	of	the	various	incarnations	of
the	Lord.	In	this	way	the	reading	matter	remains	forever	fresh,	despite
repeated	readings.
TEXT	19
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
ह ᇳ त
	
त े
	
क थ ि य ᇾ य ा ि म
	
ि द ᇼ य ा
	
ቋ ा ᇰ म ि व भ ू त य ः
	
।
प ् र ा ध ा ᇳ य त ः
	
क ु ኄ श ् र े ᇾ ठ
	
न ा ᇿ ᇰ य ᇳ त ो
	
ि व ᇿ त र ᇿ य
	
म े
	
॥
१ ९
॥śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
hanta	te	kathayiṣyāmi
divyā	hy	ātma-vibhūtayaḥ
prādhānyataḥ	kuru-śreṣṭha
nāsty	anto	vistarasya	me
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
hanta
—
yes;	
te—
unto	you;
	kathayiṣyāmi—
I	shall	speak;	
divyāḥ
—divine;	
hi
—
certainly;	
ātma-vibhūtayaḥ—
personal	opulences;	
prādhānyataḥ—
principally;
kuruśreṣṭha—
O	best	of	the	Kurus;	
na	asti—
there	is	no;	
antaḥ—
limit;
vistarasya—	
to	the	extent;	
me—
My.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	Yes,	I	will	tell	you	of	My	splendorous
manifestations,	but	only	of	those	which	are	prominent,	O	Arjuna,	for	My
opulence	is	limitless.
PURPORT
It	is	not	possible	to	comprehend	the	greatness	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	His	opulences.
The	senses	of	the	individual	soul	are	imperfect	and	do	not	permit	him	to
understand	the	totality	of	Kṛṣṇa's	affairs.	Still	the	devotees	try	to	understand
Kṛṣṇa,	but	not	on	the	principle	that	they	will	be	able	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa	fully
at	any	specific	time	or	in	any	state	of	life.	Rather,	the	very	topics	of	Kṛṣṇa	are
so	relishable	that	they	appear	to	them	as	nectar.	Thus	they	enjoy	them.	In
discussing	Kṛṣṇa's	opulences	and	His	diverse	energies,	the	pure	devotees	take
transcendental	pleasure.	Therefore	they	want	to	hear	and	discuss	them.	Kṛṣṇa
knows	that	living	entities	do	not	understand	the	extent	of	His	opulences;	He
therefore	agrees	to	state	only	the	principal	manifestations	of	His	different
energies.	The	word	
prādhānyataḥ	
(principal)	is	very	important	because	we
can	understand	only	a	few	of	the	principal	details	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	for
His	features	are	unlimited.	It	is	not	possible	to	understand	them	all.	And
vibhūti,	
as	used	in	this	verse,	refers	to	the	opulences	by	which	He	controls	the
whole	manifestation.	In	the	
Amara-kośa	
dictionary	it	is	stated	that	
vibhūti
indicates	an	exceptional	opulence.
The	impersonalist	or	the	pantheist	cannot	understand	the	exceptionalopulences	of	the	Supreme	Lord	nor	the	manifestations	of	His	divine	energy.
Both	in	the	material	world	and	in	the	spiritual	world	His	energies	are
distributed	in	every	variety	of	manifestation.	Now	Kṛṣṇa	is	describing	what
can	be	directly	perceived	by	the	common	man;	thus	part	of	His	variegated
energy	is	described	in	this	way.
TEXT	20
अ ह म ा ᇰ म ा
	
ग ु ड ा क े श
	
स व ᆼ भ ू त ा श य ि ᇿ थ त ः
	
।
अ ह म ा ि द ᇽ च
	
म ᇲ य ं
	
च
	
भ ू त ा न ा म ᇳ त
	
ए व
	
च
	
॥
२ ०
॥
aham	ātmā	guḍākeśa
sarva-bhūtāśaya-sthitaḥ
aham	ādiś	ca	madhyaṁ	ca
bhūtānām	anta	eva	ca
aham—
I;
	ātmā—
soul;
	guḍākeśa
—O	Arjuna;	
sarva-bhūta—
all	living
entities;	
āśaya-sthitaḥ—
situated	within;	
aham
—I	am;	
ādiḥ—
origin;	
ca
—also;
madhyam	—
middle;	
ca
—also;	
bhūtānām—
all	living	entities;	
antaḥ—
end;	
eva
—
certainly;	
ca—
and.
TRANSLATION
I	am	the	Self,	O	Guḍākeśa,	seated	in	the	hearts	of	all	creatures.	I	am
the	beginning,	the	middle	and	the	end	of	all	beings.
PURPORT
In	this	verse	Arjuna	is	addressed	as	Guḍākeśa,	which	means	one	who	has
conquered	the	darkness	of	sleep.	For	those	who	are	sleeping	in	the	darkness	of
ignorance,	it	is	not	possible	to	understand	how	the	Supreme	Godhead
manifests	Himself	in	the	material	and	spiritual	worlds.	Thus	this	address	by
Kṛṣṇa	to	Arjuna	is	significant.	Because	Arjuna	is	above	such	darkness,	the
Personality	of	Godhead	agrees	to	describe	His	various	opulences.
Kṛṣṇa	first	informs	Arjuna	that	He	is	the	Self	or	soul	of	the	entire	cosmic
manifestation	by	dint	of	His	primary	expansion.	Before	the	material	creation,the	Supreme	Lord,	by	His	plenary	expansion,	accepts	the	Puruṣa	incarnations,
and	from	Him	everything	begins.	Therefore	He	is	
ātmā,	
the	soul	of	the	
mahat-
tattva,	
the	universal	elements.	The	total	material	energy	is	not	the	cause	of	the
creation,	but	actually	the	Mahā-Visṇu	enters	into	the	
mahat-tattva,	
the	total
material	energy.	He	is	the	soul.	When	Mahā-Viṣṇu	enters	into	the	manifested
universes,	He	again	manifests	Himself	as	the	Supersoul	in	each	and	every
entity.	We	have	experience	that	the	personal	body	of	the	living	entity	exists
due	to	the	presence	of	the	spiritual	spark.	Without	the	existence	of	the	spiritual
spark,	the	body	cannot	develop.	Similarly,	the	material	manifestation	cannot
develop	unless	the	Supreme	Soul	of	Kṛṣṇa	enters.
The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is	existing	as	the	Supersoul	in	all
manifested	universes.	A	description	of	the	three	
puruṣa-avatāras	
is	given	in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.
	"The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	manifests	three
features,	as	Kāraṇodakaśāyī	Visṇu,	Garbhodakaśāyī	Viṣṇu	and	Kṣīrodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu,	in	this	material	manifestation."	The	Supreme	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	the	cause	of
all	causes,	lies	down	in	the	cosmic	ocean	as	Mahā-	Viṣṇu	or	Kāraṇodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu,	and	therefore	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	beginning	of	this	universe,	the	maintainer	of
the	universal	manifestation,	and	the	end	of	all	the	energy.
TEXT	21
आ ि द ᇰ य ा न ा म ह ं
	
ि व ᇾ ण ु ᇬ य ॊ ि त ष आ ं
	
र ि व र ं श ु म ा न ्
	
।
	
म ि र ि च म ᆼ ኄ त ा म ि ᇿ म
	
न ᇤ त ् र ा ण ा म ह ं
	
श श ी
	
॥
२ १
॥
ādityānām	ahaṁ	viṣṇur
jyotiṣāṁ	ravir	aṁśumān
marīcir	marutām	asmi
nakṣatrāṇām	ahaṁ	śaśī
ādityānām
—of	the	Ādityas;	
aham—
I	am;	
viṣṇuḥ—
the	Supreme	Lord;
jyotiṣām—
of	all	luminaries;	
raviḥ—
the	sun;	
aṁśumān
—radiant;	
marīciḥ—
Marīci;	
marutām
—of	the	Marutas;	
asmi
—I	am;	
nakṣatrāṇām
—of	stars;	
aham
—
I	am;	
śaśī
—the	moon.
TRANSLATION
Of	the	Ādityas	I	am	Viṣṇu,	of	lights	I	am	the	radiant	sun,	I	am	Marīciof	the	Maruts,	and	among	the	stars	I	am	the	moon.
PURPORT
There	are	twelve	Ādityas,	of	which	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	principal.	And	among	all
the	luminaries	twinkling	in	the	sky,	the	sun	is	the	chief,	and	in	the	
Brahma-
saṁhitā	
the	sun	is	accepted	as	the	glowing	effulgence	of	the	Supreme	Lord
and	is	considered	to	be	one	of	His	eyes.	Marīci	is	the	controlling	deity	of	the
heavenly	spaces.	Among	the	stars,	the	moon	is	most	prominent	at	night,	and
thus	the	moon	represents	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	22
व े द ा न ा ं
	
स ा म व े द ो ऽ ि ᇿ म
	
द े व ा न ा म ि ᇿ म
	
व ा स व ः
	
।
इ ि ᇳ द ् र य ा ण ा ं
	
म न ᇽ च ा ि ᇿ म
	
भ ू त ा न ा म ि ᇿ म
	
च े त न ा
	
॥
२ २
॥
vedānāṁ	sāma-vedo	'smi
devānām	asmi	vāsavaḥ
indriyāṇāṁ	manaś	cāsmi
bhūtānām	asmi	cetanā
vedānām
—of	all	the	
Vedas
;	
sāma-vedaḥ—
the	
Sāma-veda;	asmi—
I	am;
devānām
—of	all	the	demigods;	
asmi
—I	am;	
vāsavaḥ—
heavenly	king;
indriyāṇām—
of	all	the	senses;	
manaḥ
—the	mind;	
ca
—also;	
asmi
—I	am;
bhūtānām
—of	all	living	entities;	
asmi—
I	am;	
cetanā
—the	living	force.
TRANSLATION
Of	the	Vedas	I	am	the	Sāma-veda;	of	the	demigods	I	am	Indra;	of	the
senses	I	am	the	mind,	and	in	living	beings	I	am	the	living	force
[knowledge].
PURPORT
The	difference	between	matter	and	spirit	is	that	matter	has	no	consciousness
like	the	living	entity;	therefore	this	consciousness	is	supreme	and	eternal.Consciousness	cannot	be	produced	by	a	combination	of	matter.
TEXT	23
ኄ द ् र ा ण ा ं
	
श ं क र ቙ च ा ि ᇿ म
	
ि व ሧ े श ो
	
य ᇤ
	
र ᇤ स ा म ्
	
।
व स ू न ा ं
	
प ा व क ቙ च ा ि ᇿ म
	
म े ኄ ः
	
ि श ख ि र ण ा म ह म ्
	
॥
२ ३
॥
rudrāṇāṁ	śaṅkaraś	cāsmi
vitteśo	yakṣa-rakṣasām
vasūnāṁ	pāvakaś	cāsmi
meruḥ	śikhariṇām	aham
rudrāṇām—
of	all	the	Rudras;	
śaṅkaraḥ—
Lord	Śiva;	
ca—
also;	
asmi—
I	am;
vitteśaḥ—
the	lord	of	the	treasury;	
yakṣa-rakṣasām—
of	the	Yakṣas	and
Rākṣasas;	
vasūnām—
of	the	Vasus;	
pāvakaḥ—
fire;	
ca—
also;	
asmi—
I	am;
meruḥ—
Meru;	
śikhariṇām—
of	all	mountains;	
aham—
I	am.
TRANSLATION
Of	all	the	Rudras	I	am	Lord	Śiva;	of	the	Yakṣas	and	Rākṣasas	I	am	the
lord	of	wealth	[Kuvera];	of	the	Vasus	I	am	fire	[Agni],	and	of	the
mountains	I	am	Meru.
PURPORT
There	are	eleven	Rudras,	of	whom	Śaṅkara,	Lord	Śiva,	is	predominant.	He
is	the	incarnation	of	the	Supreme	Lord	in	charge	of	the	modes	of	ignorance	in
the	universe.	Among	the	demigods	Kuvera	is	the	chief	treasurer,	and	he	is	a
representation	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	Meru	is	a	mountain	famed	for	its	rich
natural	resources.
TEXT	24
प ु र ो ध स ा ं
	
च
	
म ु ᇨ य ं
	
म ा ं
	
ि व द ् ि ध
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
ब ृ ह ᇿ प ि त म ्
	
।
स े न ा न ी न ा म ह ं
	
ᇿ क ᇳ द ः
	
स र स ा म ि ᇿ म
	
स ा ग र ः
	
॥
२ ४
॥purodhasāṁ	ca	mukhyaṁ	māṁ
viddhi	pārtha	bṛhaspatim
senānīnām	ahaṁ	skandaḥ
sarasām	asmi	sāgaraḥ
purodhasām—
of	all	priests;	
ca
—also;	
mukhyam—
chief;	
mām
—Me;	
viddhi
—
understand;	
pārtha—
O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
bṛhaspatim—
Bṛhaspati;	
senānīnām
—
of	all	commanders;	
aham
—I	am;	
skandaḥ
—Kārtikeya;	
sarasām
—of	all
reservoirs	of	water;	
asmi
—I	am;	
sāgaraḥ
—the	ocean.
TRANSLATION
Of	priests,	O	Arjuna,	know	Me	to	be	the	chief,	Bṛhaspati,	the	lord	of
devotion.	Of	generals	I	am	Skanda,	the	lord	of	war;	and	of	bodies	of
water	I	am	the	ocean.
PURPORT
Indra	is	the	chief	demigod	of	the	heavenly	planets	and	is	known	as	the	king
of	the	heavens.	The	planet	in	which	he	reigns	is	called	Indraloka.	Bṛhaspati	is
Indra's	priest,	and	since	Indra	is	the	chief	of	all	kings,	Bṛhaspati	is	the	chief	of
all	priests.	And	as	Indra	is	the	chief	of	all	kings,	similarly	Skanda,	the	son	of
Pārvatī	and	Lord	Śiva,	is	the	chief	of	all	military	commanders.	And	of	all
bodies	of	water,	the	ocean	is	the	greatest.	These	representations	of	Kṛṣṇa	only
give	hints	of	His	greatness.
TEXT	25
म ह ष ᆼ ण ा ं
	
भ ृ ग ु र ह ं
	
ि ग र ा म ᇿ ᇸ य े क म ᇤ र म ्
	
।
	
य ᇥ
।
न ा ं
	
ज प
	
य ᇥ ो ि ᇿ म
	
ᇿ थ ा व र ा ण ा ं
	
ि ह म ा ल य ः
	
॥
२ ५
॥
maharṣīṇāṁ	bhṛgur	ahaṁ
girām	asmy	ekam	akṣaram
yajñānāṁ	japa-yajño	'smi
sthāvarāṇāṁ	himālayaḥmaharṣīṇām—
among	the	great	sages;	
bhṛguḥ—
Bhṛgu;	
aham
—I	am;	
girām
—of	vibrations;	
asmi—
I	am;	
ekam	akṣaram-praṇava;	yajñānām—
of
sacrifices;	
japa-yajñaḥ—
chanting;	
asmi—
I	am;	
sthāvarāṇām—
of	immovable
things;	
himālayaḥ—
the	Himalayan	mountains.
TRANSLATION
Of	the	great	sages	I	am	Bhṛgu;	of	vibrations	I	am	the	transcendental
om.	Of	sacrifices	I	am	the	chanting	of	the	holy	names	[japa],	and	of
immovable	things	I	am	the	Himalayas.
PURPORT
Brahmā,	the	first	living	creature	within	the	universe,	created	several	sons
for	the	propagation	of	various	kinds	of	species.	The	most	powerful	of	his	sons
is	Bhṛgu,	who	is	also	the	greatest	sage.	Of	all	the	transcendental	vibrations,
the	"
om
"(
omkara
)	represents	the	Supreme.	Of	all	the	sacrifices,	the	chanting
of	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/	Hare	Rāma,	Hare	Rāma,
Rāma	Rāma,	Hare	Hare	is	the	purest	representation	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Sometimes
animal	sacrifices	are	recommended,	but	in	the	sacrifice	of	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare
Kṛṣṇa,	there	is	no	question	of	violence.	It	is	the	simplest	and	the	purest.
Whatever	is	sublime	in	the	worlds	is	a	representation	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Therefore	the
Himalayas,	the	greatest	mountains	in	the	world,	also	represent	Him.	The
mountain	named	Meru	was	mentioned	in	a	previous	verse,	but	Meru	is
sometimes	movable,	whereas	the	Himalayas	are	never	movable.	Thus	the
Himalayas	are	greater	than	Meru.
TEXT	26
अ ᇽ व ᇰ थ ः
	
स व ᆼ व ृ ᇤ ा ण ा ं
	
द े व ष ी ᆼ ण ा ं
	
च
	
न ा र द ः
	
।
ग ᇳ ध व ा ᆼ ण ा ं
	
ि च त ् र र थ ः
	
ि स ሬ ा न ा ं
	
क ि प ल ो
	
म ु ि न ः
	
॥
२ ६
॥
aśvatthaḥ	sarva-vṛkṣāṇāṁ
devarṣīṇāṁ	ca	nāradaḥ
gandharvāṇāṁ	citrarathaḥ
siddhānāṁ	kapilo	muniḥaśvatthaḥ—
the	banyan	tree;	
sarva-vṛkṣāṇām—
of	all	trees;	
devarṣīṇām
—of
all	the	sages	amongst	the	demigods;	
ca—
and;	
nāradaḥ—
Nārada;	
gandharvā-
ṇām—
the	citizens	of	the	Gandharva	planet;	
citrarathaḥ—
Citraratha;
siddhānām—
of	all	those	who	are	perfected;	
kapilaḥ	muniḥ—
Kapila	Muni.
TRANSLATION
Of	all	trees	I	am	the	holy	fig	tree,	and	amongst	sages	and	demigods	I
am	Nārada.	Of	the	singers	of	the	gods	[Gandharvas]	I	am	Citraratha,	and
among	perfected	beings	I	am	the	sage	Kapila.
PURPORT
The	fig	tree	(
aśvattha
)	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	and	highest	trees,	and
people	in	India	often	worship	it	as	one	of	their	daily	morning	rituals.	Amongst
the	demigods	they	also	worship	Nārada,	who	is	considered	the	greatest
devotee	in	the	universe.	Thus	he	is	the	representation	of	Kṛṣṇa	as	a	devotee.
The	Gandharva	planet	is	filled	with	entities	who	sing	beautifully,	and	among
them	the	best	singer	is	Citraratha.	Amongst	the	perpetually	living	entities,
Kapila	is	considered	an	incarnation	of	Kṛṣṇa,	and	His	philosophy	is	mentioned
in	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.	
Later	on	another	Kapila	became	famous,	but	his
philosophy	was	atheistic.	Thus	there	is	a	gulf	of	difference	between	them.
TEXT	27
उ ᇫ च ै ः श ् र व स म ᇽ व ा न ा ं
	
ि व द ् ि ध
	
म ा म म ृ त ो द ् भ व म ्
	
।
ऐ र ा व त ं
	
ग ज े ᇳ द ् र ा ण ा ं
	
न र ा ण ा ं
	
च
	
न र ा ि ध प म ्
	
॥
२ ७
॥
uccaiḥśravasam	aśvānāṁ
viddhi	mām	amṛtodbhavam
airāvataṁ	gajendrāṇāṁ
narāṇāṁ	ca	narādhipam
uccaiḥśravasam—
Uccaiḥśravā;	
aśvānām—
among	horses;	
viddhi—
know;
mām—
Me;	
amṛta-udbhavam—
produced	from	the	churning	of	the	ocean;
airāvatam—
Airāvata;	
gajendrāṇām—
of	elephants;	
narāṇām—
among	humanbeings;	
ca—
and;	
narādhipam—
the	king.
TRANSLATION
Of	horses	know	Me	to	be	Uccaiḥśravā,	who	rose	out	of	the	ocean,	born
of	the	elixir	of	immortality;	of	lordly	elephants	I	am	Airāvata,	and	among
men	I	am	the	monarch.
PURPORT
The	devotee	demigods	and	the	demons	(
asuras
)	once	took	a	sea	journey.	On
this	journey,	nectar	and	poison	were	produced,	and	Lord	Śiva	drank	the
poison.	From	the	nectar	were	produced	many	entities,	of	which	there	was	a
horse	named	Uccaiḥśravā.	Another	animal	produced	from	the	nectar	was	an
elephant	named	Airāvata.	Because	these	two	animals	were	produced	from
nectar,	they	have	special	significance,	and	they	are	representatives	of	Kṛṣṇa.
Amongst	the	human	beings,	the	king	is	the	representative	of	Kṛṣṇa	because
Kṛṣṇa	is	the	maintainer	of	the	universe,	and	the	kings,	who	are	appointed	on
account	of	their	godly	qualifications,	are	maintainers	of	their	kingdoms.	Kings
like	Mahārāja	Yudhiṣṭhira,	Mahārāja	Parīkṣit	and	Lord	Rāma	were	all	highly
righteous	kings	who	always	thought	of	the	citizens'	welfare.	In	Vedic
literature,	the	king	is	considered	to	be	the	representative	of	God.	In	this	age,
however,	with	the	corruption	of	the	principles	of	religion,	monarchy	decayed
and	is	now	finally	abolished.	It	is	to	be	understood	that	in	the	past,	however,
people	were	more	happy	under	righteous	kings.
TEXT	28
आ य ु ध ा न ा म ह ं
	
व ज ् र ं
	
ध े न ू न ा म ि ᇿ म
	
क ा म ध ु क ्
	
।
प ् र ज न ᇽ च ा ि ᇿ म
	
क ᇳ द प ᆼ ः
	
स प ा ᆼ ण ा म ि ᇿ म
	
व ा स ु ि क ः
	
॥
२ ८
॥
āyudhānām	ahaṁ	vajraṁ
dhenūnām	asmi	kāmadhuk
prajanaś	cāsmi	kandarpaḥ
sarpāṇām	asmi	vāsukiḥāyudhānām
—of	all	weapons;	
aham
—I	am;	
vajram
—the	thunderbolt;
dhenūnām
—of	cows;	
asmi
—I	am;	
kāmadhuk
—the	
surabhi
	cows;	
prajanaḥ
—
for	begetting	children;	
ca
—and;	
asmi—
I	am;	
kandarpaḥ
—Cupid;	
sarpāṇām
—
of	all	snakes;	
asmi
—I	am;	
vāsukiḥ
—Vāsuki.
TRANSLATION
Of	weapons	I	am	the	thunderbolt;	among	cows	I	am	the	surabhi,	givers
of	abundant	milk.	Of	procreators	I	am	Kandarpa,	the	god	of	love,	and	of
serpents	I	am	Vāsuki,	the	chief.
PURPORT
The	thunderbolt,	indeed	a	mighty	weapon,	represents	Kṛṣṇa's	power.	In
Kṛṣṇaloka	in	the	spiritual	sky	there	are	cows	which	can	be	milked	at	any	time,
and	they	give	as	much	milk	as	one	likes.	Of	course	such	cows	do	not	exist	in
this	material	world,	but	there	is	mention	of	them	in	Kṛṣṇaloka.	The	Lord	keeps
many	such	cows,	which	are	called	
surabhi.	
It	is	stated	that	the	Lord	is	engaged
in	herding	the	
surabhi	
cows.	Kandarpa	is	the	sex	desire	for	presenting	good
sons;	therefore	Kandarpa	is	the	representative	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Sometimes	sex	is
engaged	in	only	for	sense	gratification;	such	sex	does	not	represent	Kṛṣṇa.	But
sex	for	the	generation	of	good	children	is	called	Kandarpa	and	represents
Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	29
अ न ᇳ त ᇽ च ा ि ᇿ म
	
न ा ग ा न ा ं
	
व ኄ ण ो
	
य ा द स ा म ह म ्
	
।
ि प त ॄ ण ा म य ᆼ म ा
	
च ा ि ᇿ म
	
य म ः
	
स ं य म त ा म ह म ्
	
॥
२ ९
॥
anantaś	cāsmi	nāgānāṁ
varuṇo	yādasām	aham
pitṝṇām	aryamā	cāsmi
yamaḥ	saṁyamatām	aham
anantaḥ—
Ananta;	
ca—
also;	
asmi—
I	am;	
nāgānām—
of	all	serpents;
varuṇaḥ—
the	demigod	controlling	the	water;	
yādasām—
of	all	aquatics;	
aham—
I	am;
	piṭṝnām—
of	the	ancestors;	
aryamā—
Aryāma;	
ca—
also;	
asmi—
I	am;
yamaḥ—
the	controller	of	death;	
saṁyamatām—
of	all	regulators;	
aham
—I	am.
TRANSLATION
Of	the	celestial	Nāga	snakes	I	am	Ananta;	of	the	aquatic	deities	I	am
Varuṇa.	Of	departed	ancestors	I	am	Aryamā,	and	among	the	dispensers
of	law	I	am	Yama,	lord	of	death.
PURPORT
Among	the	many	celestial	Nvga	serpents,	Ananta	is	the	greatest,	as	is
Varuṇa	among	the	aquatics.	They	both	represent	Kṛṣṇa.	There	is	also	a	planet
of	trees	presided	over	by	Aryamā,	who	represents	Kṛṣṇa.	There	are	many
living	entities	who	give	punishment	to	the	miscreants,	and	among	them	Yama
is	the	chief.	Yama	is	situated	in	a	planet	near	this	earthly	planet,	and	after
death	those	who	are	very	sinful	are	taken	there,	and	Yama	arranges	different
kinds	of	punishments	for	them.
TEXT	30
प ् र ቌ ा द ᇽ च ा ि ᇿ म
	
द ै ᇰ य ा न ा ं
	
क ा ल ः
	
क ल य त ा म ह म ्
	
।
म ृ ग ा ण ा ं
	
च
	
म ृ ग े ᇳ द ् र ो ऽ ह ं
	
व ै न त े य ᇽ च
	
प ि ᇤ ण ा म ्
	
॥
३ ०
॥
prahlādaś	cāsmi	daityānāṁ
kālaḥ	kalayatām	aham
mṛgāṇāṁ	ca	mṛgendro	'haṁ
vainateyaś	ca	pakṣiṇām
prahlādaḥ—
Prahlāda;	
ca—
also;	
asmi—
I	am;	
daityānām—
of	the	demons;
kālaḥ—
time;	
kalayatām—
of	subduers;	
aham—
I	am;	
mṛgāṇām—
of	animals;	
ca
—
and;	
mṛgendraḥ—
the	lion;	
aham—
I	am;	
vainateyaḥ—
Garuḍa;	
ca—
also;
pakṣiṇām—
of	birds.
TRANSLATIONAmong	the	Daitya	demons	I	am	the	devoted	Prahlāda;	among	subduers
I	am	time;	among	the	beasts	I	am	the	lion,	and	among	birds	I	am	Garuḍa,
the	feathered	carrier	of	Viṣṇu.
PURPORT
Diti	and	Aditi	are	two	sisters.	The	sons	of	Aditi	are	called	Ādityas,	and	the
sons	of	Diti	are	called	Daityas.	All	the	Ādityas	are	devotees	of	the	Lord,	and
all	the	Daityas	are	atheistic.	Although	Prahlāda	was	born	in	the	family	of	the
Daityas,	he	was	a	great	devotee	from	his	childhood.	Because	of	his	devotional
service	and	godly	nature,	he	is	considered	to	be	a	representative	of	Kṛṣṇa.
There	are	many	subduing	principles,	but	time	wears	down	all	things	in	the
material	universe	and	so	represents	Kṛṣṇa.	Of	the	many	animals,	the	lion	is	the
most	powerful	and	ferocious,	and	of	the	million	varieties	of	birds,	Garuḍa,	the
bearer	of	Lord	Viṣṇu,	is	the	greatest.
TEXT	31
प व न ः
	
प व त ा म ि ᇿ म
	
र ा म ः
	
श ᇿ त ् र भ ृ त ा म ह म ्
	
।
झ ष ा ण ा ं
	
म क र ᇽ च ा ि ᇿ म
	
स ् र ो त स ा म ि ᇿ म
	
ज ा ቉ व ी
	
॥
३ १
॥
pavanaḥ	pavatām	asmi
rāmaḥ	śastra-bhṛtām	aham
jhaṣāṇāṁ	makaraś	cāsmi
srotasām	asmi	jāhnavī
pavanaḥ—
the	wind;	
pavatām—
of	all	that	purifies;	
asmi
—I	am;	
rāmaḥ
—
Rāma;	
śastra-bhṛtām
—of	the	carriers	of	weapons;	
aham
—I	am;	
jhaṣāṇām
—
of	all	aquatics;	
makaraḥ—
shark;	
ca	asmi—
I	am	also;	
srotasām
—of	flowing
rivers;	
asmi
—I	am;	
jāhnavī
—the	River	Ganges.
TRANSLATION
Of	purifiers	I	am	the	wind;	of	the	wielders	of	weapons	I	am	Rāma;	of
fishes	I	am	the	shark,	and	of	flowing	rivers	I	am	the	Ganges.PURPORT
Of	all	the	aquatics	the	shark	is	one	of	the	biggest	and	is	certainly	the	most
dangerous	to	man.	Thus	the	shark	represents	Kṛṣṇa.	And	of	rivers,	the	greatest
in	India	is	the	Mother	Ganges.	Lord	Rāmacandra,	of	the	
Rāmāyaṇa
,	an
incarnation	of	Kṛṣṇa,	is	the	mightest	of	warriors.
TEXT	32
स ग ा ᆼ ण ा म ा ि द र ᇳ त ᇽ च
	
म ᇲ य ं
	
च ै व ा ह म ज ु ᆼ न
	
।
अ ᇲ य ा ᇰ म ि व ሱ ा
	
ि व ሱ ा न ा ं
	
व ा द ः
	
प ् र व द त ा म ह म ्
	
॥
३ २
॥
sargāṇām	ādir	antaś	ca
madhyaṁ	caivāham	arjuna
adhyātma-vidyā	vidyānāṁ
vādaḥ	pravadatām	aham
sargāṇām
—of	all	creations;	
ādiḥ
—beginning;	
antaḥ
—end;	
ca
—and;
madhyam—
middle;	
ca
—also;	
eva
—certainly;	
aham
—I	am;	
arjuna
—O
Arjuna;	
adhyātma-vidyā—
spiritual	knowledge;	
vidyānām—
of	all	education;
vādaḥ—
natural	conclusion;	
pravadatām
—of	arguments;	
aham
—I	am.
TRANSLATION
Of	all	creations	I	am	the	beginning	and	the	end	and	also	the	middle,	O
Arjuna.	Of	all	sciences	I	am	the	spiritual	science	of	the	Self,	and	among
logicians	I	am	the	conclusive	truth.
PURPORT
Among	created	manifestations,	the	total	material	elements	are	first	created
by	Mahā-Viṣṇu	and	are	annihilated	by	Lord	Śiva.	Brahmā	is	the	secondary
creator.	All	these	created	elements	are	different	incarnations	of	the	material
qualities	of	the	Supreme	Lord;	therefore	He	is	the	beginning,	the	middle	and
the	end	of	all	creation.Regarding	the	spiritual	science	of	the	Self,	there	are	many	literatures,	such
as	the	four	
Vedas
,	the	
Vedānta-sūtra
	and	the	
Purāṇas
,	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam	
and	the	
Gītā
.	These	are	all	representatives	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Among
logicians	there	are	different	stages	of	argument.	The	presentation	of	evidence
is	called	
japa.	
The	attempt	to	defeat	one	another	is	called	
vitaṇḍa,	
and	the
final	conclusion	is	called	
vāda.
	The	conclusive	truth,	the	end	of	all	reasoning
processes,	is	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	33
अ ᇤ र ा ण ा म क ा र ो ऽ ि ᇿ म
	
ሲ ᇳ ሲ ः
	
स ा म ा ि स क ᇿ य
	
च
	
।
अ ह म े व ा ᇤ य ः
	
क ा ल ो
	
ध ा त ा ऽ ह ं
	
ि व ᇽ व त ो म ु ख ः
	
॥
३ ३
॥
akṣarāṇām	akāro	'smi
dvandvaḥ	sāmāsikasya	ca
aham	evākṣayaḥ	kālo
dhātāhaṁ	viśvato-mukhaḥ
akṣarāṇām
—of	letters;	
akāraḥ
—the	first;	
asmi
—I	am;	
dvandvaḥ
—dual;
sāmāsikāsya
—compounds;	
ca
—and;	
aham
—I	am;	
eva
—certainly;	
akṣayaḥ
—
eternal;	
kālaḥ
—time;	
dhātā
—creator;	
aham
—I	am;	
viśvato-mukhaḥ
—
Brahmā.
TRANSLATION
Of	letters	I	am	the	letter	A,	and	among	compounds	I	am	the	dual	word.
I	am	also	inexhaustable	time,	and	of	creators	I	am	Brahmā,	whose
manifold	faces	turn	everywhere.
PURPORT
Akāra,	
the	first	letter	of	the	Sanskrit	alphabet,	is	the	beginning	of	the	Vedic
literature.	Without	
akāra,	
nothing	can	be	sounded;	therefore	it	is	the	beginning
of	sound.	In	Sanskrit	there	are	also	many	compound	words,	of	which	the	dual
word,	like	Rāma-kṛṣṇa,	is	called	
dvandvaḥ.	
For	instance,	Rāma	and	Kṛṣṇahave	the	same	rhythm	and	therefore	are	called	dual.
Among	all	kinds	of	killers,	time	is	the	ultimate	because	time	kills
everything.	Time	is	the	representative	of	Kṛṣṇa	because	in	due	course	of	time
there	will	be	a	great	fire	and	everything	will	be	annihilated.
Among	the	creators	and	living	entities,	Brahmā	is	the	chief.	The	various
Brahmās	exhibit	four,	eight,	sixteen,	etc.,	heads	accordingly,	and	they	are	the
chief	creators	in	their	respective	universes.	The	Brahmās	are	representatives	of
Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	34
म ृ ᇰ य ु ः
	
स व ᆼ ह र ᇽ च ा ह म ु द ् भ व ᇽ च
	
भ ि व ᇾ य त ा म ्
	
।
क ी ि त ᆼ ः
	
श ् र ी व ा ᆼ ᇧ च
	
न ा र ी ण ा ं
	
ᇿ म ृ ि त म ᆹ ध ा
	
ध ृ ि त ः
	
ᇤ म ा
	
॥
३ ४ ऽ
mṛtyuḥ	sarva-haraś	cāham
udbhavaś	ca	bhaviṣyatām
kīrtiḥ	śrīr	vāk	ca	nārīṇāṁ
smṛtir	medhā	dhṛtiḥ	kṣamā
mṛtyuḥ—
death;	
sarva-haraḥ—
all-devouring;	
ca—
also;	
aham—
I	am;
udbhavaḥ—
generation;	
ca—
also;	
bhaviṣyatām—
of	the	future;	
kīrtiḥ—
fame;
śrīḥ	vāk—
beautiful	speech;	
ca—
also;	
nārīṇāṁ—
of	women;	
smṛtiḥ—
memory;
medhā—
intelligence;	
dhṛtiḥ—
faithfulness;	
kṣamā—
patience.
TRANSLATION
I	am	all-devouring	death,	and	I	am	the	generator	of	all	things	yet	to	be.
Among	women	I	am	fame,	fortune,	speech,	memory,	intelligence,
faithfulness	and	patience.
PURPORT
As	soon	as	a	man	is	born,	he	dies	at	every	moment.	Thus	death	is	devouring
every	living	entity	at	every	moment,	but	the	last	stroke	is	called	death	itself.
That	death	is	Kṛṣṇa.	All	species	of	life	undergo	six	basic	changes.	They	are
born,	they	grow,	they	remain	for	some	time,	they	reproduce,	they	dwindle	andfinally	vanish.	Of	these	changes,	the	first	is	deliverance	from	the	womb,	and
that	is	Kṛṣṇa.	The	first	generation	is	the	beginning	of	all	future	activities.
The	six	opulences	listed	are	considered	to	be	feminine.	If	a	woman
possesses	all	of	them	or	some	of	them	she	becomes	glorious.	Sanskrit	is	a
perfect	language	and	is	therefore	very	glorious.	After	studying,	if	one	can
remember	the	subject	matter,	he	is	gifted	with	good	memory,	or	
smṛti
	One
need	not	read	many	books	on	different	subject	matters;	the	ability	to
remember	a	few	and	quote	them	when	necessary	is	also	another	opulence.
TEXT	35
ब ृ ह ᇰ स ा म
	
त थ ा
	
स ा ᇸ न ा ं
	
ग ा य त ् र ी
	
छ ᇳ द स ा म ह म ्
	
।
म ा स ा न ा ं
	
म ा ग ᆼ श ी ष ो ᆼ ऽ ह म ृ त ू न ा ं
	
क ु स ु म ा क र ः
	
॥
३ ५
॥
bṛhat-sāma	tathā	sāmnāṁ
gāyatrī	chandasām	aham
māsānāṁ	mārga-śīrṣo	'ham
ṛtūnāṁ	kusumākaraḥ
bṛhat-sāma—
the	
Bṛhat-sāma;	tathā—
also;	
sāmnām—
of	the	
Sāma-veda
song;	
gāyatrī—
the	Gāyatrī	hymns;	
chandasām—
of	all	poetry;	
aham—
I	am;
māsānām—
of	months;	
mārga-śīrṣo	'ham—
the	month	of	November-December;
aham—
I	am;	
ṛtūnām—
of	all	seasons;	
kusumākaraḥ—
spring.
TRANSLATION
Of	hymns	I	am	the	Bṛhat-sāma	sung	to	the	Lord	Indra,	and	of	poetry	I
am	the	Gāyatrī	verse,	sung	daily	by	brāhmaṇas.	Of	months	I	am
November	and	December,	and	of	seasons	I	am	flower-bearing	spring.
PURPORT
It	has	already	been	explained	by	the	Lord	that	amongst	all	the	
Vedas,	
the
Sāma-veda	
is	rich	with	beautiful	songs	played	by	the	various	demigods.	One
of	these	songs	is	the	
Bṛhat-sāma,	
which	has	an	exquisite	melody	and	is	sung
at	midnight.In	Sanskrit,	there	are	definite	rules	that	regulate	poetry;	rhyme	and	meter
are	not	written	whimsically,	as	in	much	modern	poetry.	Amongst	the	regulated
poetry,	the	Gāyatrī	
mantra,	
which	is	chanted	by	the	duly	qualified	
brāhmaṇas,
is	the	most	prominent.	The	Gāyatrī	
mantra	
is	mentioned	in	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam.	
Because	the	Gāyatrī	
mantra	
isespecially	meant	for	God
realization,	it	represents	the	Supreme	Lord.	This	
mantra	
is	meant	for
spiritually	advanced	people,	and	when	one	attains	success	in	chanting	it,	he
can	enter	into	the	transcendental	position	of	the	Lord.	One	must	first	acquire
the	qualities	of	the	perfectly	situated	person,	the	qualities	of	goodness
according	to	the	laws	of	material	nature,	in	order	to	chant	the	Gāyatrī	
mantra.
The	Gāyatrī	
mantra	
is	very	important	in	Vedic	civilization	and	is	considered
to	be	the	sound	incarnation	of	Brahman.	Brahmā	is	its	initiator,	and	it	is
passed	down	from	him	in	disciplic	succession.
The	months	of	November	and	December	are	considered	the	best	of	all
months	because	in	India	grains	are	collected	from	the	fields	at	this	time,	and
the	people	become	very	happy.	Of	course	spring	is	a	season	universally	liked
because	it	is	neither	too	hot	nor	too	cold,	and	the	flowers	and	trees	blossom
and	flourish.	In	spring	there	are	also	many	ceremonies	commemorating
Kṛṣṇa's	pastimes;	therefore	this	is	considered	to	be	the	most	joyful	of	all
seasons,	and	it	is	the	representative	of	the	Supreme	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	36
ሱ ू त ं
	
छ ल य त ा म ि ᇿ म
	
त े ज ᇿ त े ज ि ᇿ व न ा म ह म ्
	
।
ज य ो ऽ ि ᇿ म
	
ᇼ य व स ा य ो ऽ ि ᇿ म
	
स ᇰ ᇰ व ं
	
स ᇰ ᇰ व व त ा म ह म ्
	
॥
३ ६
॥
dyūtaṁ	chalayatām	asmi
tejas	tejasvinām	aham
jayo	'smi	vyavasāyo	'smi
sattvaṁ	sattvavatām	aham
dyūtam—
gambling;	
chalayatām—
of	all	cheats;	
asmi—
I	am;	
tejaḥ—
splendid;	
tejasvinām—
of	everything	splendid;	
aham—
I	am;	
jayaḥ—
victory;
asmi
—I	am;	
vyavasāyaḥ—
adventure;	
asmi—
I	am;	
sattvam—
strength;
sattvavatām—
of	all	the	strong;	
aham—
I	am.
TRANSLATIONI	am	also	the	gambling	of	cheats,	and	of	the	splendid	I	am	the	splendor.
I	am	victory,	I	am	adventure,	and	I	am	the	strength	of	the	strong.
PURPORT
There	are	many	kinds	of	cheaters	all	over	the	universe.	Of	all	cheating
processes,	gambling	stands	supreme	and	therefore	represents	Kṛṣṇa.	As	the
Supreme,	Kṛṣṇa	can	be	more	deceitful	than	any	mere	man.	If	Kṛṣṇa	chooses	to
deceive	a	person,	no	one	can	surpass	Him	in	His	deceit.	His	greatness	is	not
simply	one-sided-it	is	all-sided.
Among	the	victorious,	He	is	victory.	He	is	the	splendor	of	the	splendid.
Among	enterprising	industrialists,	He	is	the	most	enterprising.	Among
adventurers,	He	is	the	most	adventurous,	and	among	the	strong,	He	is	the
strongest.	When	Kṛṣṇa	was	present	on	earth,	no	one	could	surpass	Him	in
strength.	Even	in	His	childhood	He	lifted	Govardhana	Hill.	No	one	can
surpass	Him	in	cheating,	no	one	can	surpass	Him	in	splendor,	no	one	can
surpass	Him	in	victory,	no	one	can	surpass	Him	in	enterprise,	and	no	one	can
surpass	Him	in	strength.
TEXT	37
व ृ ᇾ ण ी न ा ं
	
व ा स ु द े व ो ऽ ि ᇿ म
	
प ा ᇯ ड व ा न ा ं
	
ध न ᇮ ज य ः
	
।
म ु न ी न ा म ᇴ य ह ं
	
ᇼ य ा स ः
	
क व ी न ा म ु श न ा
	
क ि व ः
	
॥
३ ७
॥
vṛṣṇīnāṁ	vāsudevo	'smi
pāṇḍavānāṁ	dhanañjayaḥ
munīnām	apy	ahaṁ	vyāsaḥ
kavīnām	uśanā	kaviḥ
vṛṣṇīnām
—of	the	descendants	of	Vṛṣṇi;	
vāsudevaḥ—
Kṛṣṇa	in	Dvāraka;
asmi
—I	am;
	pāṇḍavānām—
of	the	Pāṇḍavas;	
dhanañjayaḥ—
Arjuna;	
munīnām
—of	the	sages;	
api—
also;	
aham
—I	am;	
vyāsaḥ
—Vyāsa,	the	compiler	of
allVedic	literature;	
kavīnām
—of	all	great	thinkers;	
uśanā
—Uśanā;	
kaviḥ—
the
thinker.
TRANSLATIONOf	the	descendants	of	Vṛṣṇi	I	am	Vāsudeva,	and	of	the	Pāṇḍavas	I	am
Arjuna.	Of	the	sages	I	am	Vyāsa,	and	among	great	thinkers	I	am	Uśanā.
PURPORT
Kṛṣṇa	is	the	original	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	and	Vāsudeva	is	the
immediate	expansion	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Both	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	and	Baladeva	appear	as	the
sons	of	Vasudeva.	Amongst	the	sons	of	Pāṇḍu,	Arjuna	is	famous	and	valiant.
Indeed,	he	is	the	best	of	men	and	therefore	represents	Kṛṣṇa.	Among	the
munis,	
or	learned	men	conversant	in	Vedic	knowledge,	Vyāsa	is	the	greatest
because	he	explained	Vedic	knowledge	in	many	different	ways	for	the
understanding	of	the	common	mass	of	people	in	this	age	of	Kali.	And	Vyāsa	is
also	known	as	an	incarnation	of	Kṛṣṇa;	therefore	Vyāsa	also	represents	Kṛṣṇa.
Kavis	
are	those	who	are	capable	of	thinking	thoroughly	on	any	subject	matter.
Among	the	
kavis,	
Uśanā	was	the	spiritual	master	of	the	demons;	he	was
extremely	intelligent,	far-seeing,	political	and	spiritual	in	every	way.	Thus
Uśanā	is	another	representative	of	the	opulence	of	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	38
द ᇯ ड ो
	
द म य त ा म ि ᇿ म
	
न ी ि त र ि ᇿ म
	
ि ज ग ी ष त ा म ्
	
।
म ौ न ं
	
च ै व ा ि ᇿ म
	
ग ु ቋ ा न ा ं
	
ᇥ ा न ं
	
ᇥ ा न व त ा म ह म ्
	
॥
३ ८
॥
daṇḍo	damayatām	asmi
nītir	asmi	jigīṣatām
maunaṁ	caivāsmi	guhyānāṁ
jñānaṁ	jñānavatām	aham
daṇḍaḥ—
punishment;	
damayatām—
of	all	separation;	
asmi—
I	am;	
nītiḥ
—
morality;	
asmi—
I	am;	
jigīṣatām—
of	the	victorious;	
maunam—
silence;	
ca
—
and;	
eva—
also;	
asmi—
I	am;	
guhyānām—
of	secrets;	
jñānam—
knowledge;
jñānavatām
—of	the	wise;	
aham—
I	am.
TRANSLATIONAmong	punishments	I	am	the	rod	of	chastisement,	and	of	those	who
seek	victory,	I	am	morality.	Of	secret	things	I	am	silence,	and	of	the	wise	I
am	wisdom.
PURPORT
There	are	many	suppressing	agents,	of	which	the	most	important	are	those
that	cut	down	the	miscreants.	When	miscreants	are	punished,	the	rod	of
chastisement	represents	Kṛṣṇa.	Among	those	who	are	trying	to	be	victorious
in	some	field	of	activity,	the	most	victorious	element	is	morality.	Among	the
confidential	activities	of	hearing,	thinking	and	meditating,	silence	is	most
important	because	by	silence	one	can	make	progress	very	quickly.	The	wise
man	is	he	who	can	discriminate	between	matter	and	spirit,	between	God's
superior	and	inferior	natures.	Such	knowledge	is	Kṛṣṇa	Himself.
TEXT	39
य ᇫ च ा ि प
	
स व ᆼ भ ू त ा न ा ं
	
ब ी ज ं
	
त द ह म ज ु ᆼ न
	
।
न
	
त द ि ᇿ त
	
ि व न ा
	
य ᇰ ᇿ य ा ᇳ म य ा
	
भ ू त ं
	
च र ा च र म ्
	
॥
३ ९
॥
yac	cāpi	sarva-bhūtānāṁ
bījaṁ	tad	aham	arjuna
na	tad	asti	vinā	yat	syān
mayā	bhūtaṁ	carācaram
yat—
whatever;	
ca—
also;	
api—
may	be;	
sarva-bhūtānām—
of	all	creations;
bījam—
the	seed;	
tat—
that;	
aham—
I	am;	
arjuna
—O	Arjuna;	
na—
not;	
tat
—
that;	
asti—
there	is;	
vinā—
without;	
yat—
that;	
syāt—
exists;	
mayā—
by	Me;
bhūtam—
created;	
carācaram—
moving	and	unmoving.
TRANSLATION
Furthermore,	O	Arjuna,	I	am	the	generating	seed	of	all	existences.
There	is	no	being-moving	or	unmoving-that	can	exist	without	Me.
PURPORTEverything	has	a	cause,	and	that	cause	or	seed	of	manifestation	is	Kṛṣṇa.
Without	Kṛṣṇa's	energy,	nothing	can	exist;	therefore	He	is	called	omnipotent.
Without	His	potency,	neither	the	movable	nor	the	unmovable	can	exist.
Whatever	existence	is	not	founded	on	the	energy	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	called	
māyā,	
that
which	is	not.
TEXT	40
न ा ᇳ त ो ऽ ि ᇿ त
	
म म
	
ि द ᇼ य ा न ा ं
	
ि व भ ू त ी न ा ं
	
प र ᇳ त प
	
।
ए ष
	
त ू ራ े श त ः
	
प ् र ो ᇧ त ो
	
ि व भ ू त े ि व ᆼ ᇿ त र ो
	
म य ा
	
॥
४ ०
॥
nānto	'sti	mama	divyānāṁ
vibhūtīnāṁ	parantapa
eṣa	tūddeśataḥ	prokto
vibhūter	vistaro	mayā
na—
nor;	
antaḥ—
a	limit;	
asti—
isthere;	
mama—
of	My;	
divyānām—
divine;
vibhūtīnam—
opulences;	
parantapa
—O	conquerer	of	the	enemies;	
eṣaḥ—
all
this;	
tu—
that;	
uddeśataḥ—
examples;	
proktaḥ—
spoken;	
vibhūteḥ—
opulences;
vistaraḥ—
expanded;	
mayā
—by	Me.
TRANSLATION
O	mighty	conqueror	of	enemies,	there	is	no	end	to	My	divine
manifestations.	What	I	have	spoken	to	you	is	but	a	mere	indication	of	My
infinite	opulences.
PURPORT
As	stated	in	the	Vedic	literature,	although	the	opulences	and	energies	of	the
Supreme	are	understood	in	various	ways,	there	is	no	limit	to	such	opulences;
therefore	not	all	the	opulences	and	energies	can	be	explained.	Simply	a	few
examples	are	being	described	to	Arjuna	to	pacify	his	inquisitiveness.
TEXT	41य ሱ द ् ि व भ ू ि त म ᇰ स ᇰ ᇰ व ं
	
श ् र ी म द ू ि ज ᆼ त म े व
	
व ा
	
।
त ሧ द े व ा व ग ᇫ छ
	
ᇰ व ं
	
म म
	
त े ज ो ं श स ᇸ भ व म ्
	
॥
४ १
॥
yad	yad	vibhūtimat	sattvaṁ
śrīmad	ūrjitam	eva	vā
tat	tad	evāvagaccha	tvaṁ
mama	tejo'ṁśa-sambhavam
yat	yat
—whatever;	
vibhūti
—opulences;	
mat
—having;	
sattvam
—existence;
śrīmat
—beautiful;	
ūrjitam
—glorious;	
eva
—certainly;	
vā
—or;	
tat	tat
—all
those;	
eva
—certainly;	
avagaccha
—you	must	know;	
tvam
—you;	
mama
—My;
tejaḥ—
splendor;	
aṁśa
—partly;	
sambhavam
—born	of.
TRANSLATION
Know	that	all	beautiful,	glorious,	and	mighty	creations	spring	from	but
a	spark	of	My	splendor.
PURPORT
Any	glorious	or	beautiful	existence	should	be	understood	to	be	but	a
fragmental	manifestation	of	Kṛṣṇa's	opulence,	whether	it	be	in	the	spiritual	or
material	world.	Anything	extraordinarily	opulent	should	be	considered	to
represent	Kṛṣṇa's	opulence.
TEXT	42
अ थ व ा
	
ब ह ु न ै त े न
	
ि क ं
	
ᇥ ा त े न
	
त व ा ज ु ᆼ न
	
।
ि व ᇾ ट ᇷ य ा ह ि म द ं
	
क ृ ᇰ ᇿ न म े क ा ं श े न
	
ि ᇿ थ त ो
	
ज ग त ्
	
॥
४ २
॥
athavā	bahunaitena
kiṁ	jñātena	tavārjuna
viṣṭabhyāham	idaṁ	kṛtsnam
ekāṁśena	sthito	jagat
athavā—
or;	
bahunā—
many;	
etena
—by	this	kind;	
kim—
what;	
jñātena—
knowing;	
tava—
you;
	arjuna
—O	Arjuna;	
viṣṭabhya—
entire;	
aham—
I;
	idam
—
this;	
kṛtsnam—
all	manifestations;	
eka—
one;	
aṁśena
—part;	
sthithaḥ
—
situated;	
jagat—
in	the	universe.
TRANSLATION
But	what	need	is	there,	Arjuna,	for	all	this	detailed	knowledge?	With	a
single	fragment	of	Myself	I	pervade	and	support	this	entire	universe.
PURPORT
The	Supreme	Lord	is	represented	throughout	the	entire	material	universes
by	His	entering	into	all	things	as	the	Supersoul.	The	Lord	here	tells	Arjuna
that	there	is	no	point	in	understanding	how	things	exist	in	their	separate
opulence	and	grandeur.	He	should	know	that	all	things	are	existing	due	to
Kṛṣṇa's	entering	them	as	Supersoul.	From	Brahmā,	the	most	gigantic	entity,	on
down	to	the	smallest	ant,	all	are	existing	because	the	Lord	has	entered	each
and	all	and	is	sustaining	them.
Worship	of	demigods	is	discouraged	herein	because	even	the	greatest
demigods	like	Brahmā	and	Śiva	only	represent	part	of	the	opulence	of	the
Supreme	Lord.	He	is	the	origin	of	everyone	born,	and	no	one	is	greater	than
Him.	He	is	
samatā,	
which	means	that	no	one	is	superior	to	Him	and	that	no
one	is	equal	to	Him.	In	the	
Viṣṇu-mantra
	it	is	said	that	one	who	considers	the
Supreme	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	in	the	same	category	with	demigods
—	
be	they	even
Brahmā	or	Śiva
—
becomes	at	once	an	atheist.	If,	however,	one	thoroughly
studies	the	different	descriptions	of	the	opulences	and	expansions	of	Kṛṣṇa's
energy,	then	one	can	understand	without	any	doubt	the	position	of	Lord	Śrī
Kṛṣṇa	and	can	fix	his	mind	in	the	worship	of	Kṛṣṇa	without	deviation.	The
Lord	is	all-pervading	by	the	expansion	of	His	partial	representation,	the
Supersoul,	who	enters	into	everything	that	is.	Pure	devotees,	therefore,
concentrate	their	minds	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	in	full	devotional	service;
therefore	they	are	always	situated	in	the	transcendental	position.	Devotional
service	and	worship	of	Kṛṣṇa	are	very	clearly	indicated	in	this	chapter	in
verses	eight	to	eleven.	That	is	the	way	of	pure	devotional	service.	How	one
can	attain	the	highest	devotional	perfection	of	association	with	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead	has	been	thoroughly	explained	in	this	chapter.Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	Tenth	Chapter	of	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhagavad-gītā
	in	the	matter	of	the	Opulence	of	the	Absolute.Chapter-11
CHAPTER	ELEVEN
The	Universal	Form
TEXT	1
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
म द न ु ग ् र ह ा य
	
प र म ं
	
ग ु ቋ म ᇲ य ा ᇰ म स ं ि ᇥ त म ्
	
।
य ᇰ ᇰ व य ो ᇧ त ं
	
व च ᇿ त े न
	
म ो ह ो ऽ य ं
	
ि व ग त ो
	
म म
	
॥
१
॥
arjuna	uvāca
mad-anugrahāya	paramaṁ
guhyam	adhyātma-saṁjñitam
yat	tvayoktaṁ	vacas	tenamoho	'yaṁ	vigato	mama
arjunaḥ	uvāca—
Arjuna	said;	
mat-anugrahāya—
just	to	show	me	favor;
paramam—
supreme;	
guhyam—
confidential;	
adhyātma—
spiritual;	
saṁjñitam
—
in	the	matter	of;	
yat—
what;	
tvayā—
by	You;
	uktam—
said;	
vacaḥ—
words;
tena—
by	that;	
mohaḥ—
illusion;	
ayam—
this;	
vigataḥ—
iseducated;	
mama—
my.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	said:	I	have	heard	Your	instruction	on	confidential	spiritual
matters	which	You	have	so	kindly	delivered	unto	me,	and	my	illusion	is
now	dispelled.
PURPORT
This	chapter	reveals	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	cause	of	all	causes.	He	is	even	the	cause
of	the	Mahā-Viṣṇu,	and	from	Him	the	material	universes	emanate.	Kṛṣṇa	is
not	an	incarnation;	He	is	the	source	of	all	incarnations.	That	has	been
completely	explained	in	the	last	chapter.
Now,	as	far	as	Arjuna	is	concerned,	he	says	that	his	illusion	is	over.	This
means	that	Arjuna	no	longer	thinks	of	Kṛṣṇa	as	a	mere	human	being,	as	a
friend	of	his,	but	as	the	source	of	everything.	Arjuna	is	very	enlightened	and	is
glad	that	he	has	a	great	friend	like	Kṛṣṇa,	but	now	he	is	thinking	that	although
he	may	accept	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	source	of	everything,	others	may	not.	So	in	order
to	establish	Kṛṣṇa's	divinity	for	all,	he	is	requesting	Kṛṣṇa	in	this	chapter	to
show	His	universal	form.	Actually	when	one	sees	the	universal	form	of	Kṛṣṇa
one	becomes	frightened,	like	Arjuna,	but	Kṛṣṇa	is	so	kind	that	after	showing	it
He	converts	Himself	again	into	His	original	form.	Arjuna	agrees	to	what
Kṛṣṇa	says	several	times.	Kṛṣṇa	is	speaking	to	him	just	for	his	benefit,	and
Arjuna	acknowledges	that	all	this	is	happening	to	him	by	Kṛṣṇa's	grace.	He	is
now	convinced	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	cause	of	all	causes	and	is	present	in
everyone's	heart	as	the	Supersoul.
TEXT	2भ व ा ᇴ य य ौ
	
ि ह
	
भ ू त ा न ा ं
	
श ् ኄ त ौ
	
ि व ᇿ त र श ो
	
म य ा
	
।
ᇰ व ሧ ः
	
क म ल प त ् र ा ᇤ
	
म ा ह ा ᇰ ᇸ य म ि प
	
च ा ᇼ य य म ्
	
॥
२
॥
bhavāpyayau	hi	bhūtānāṁ
śrutau	vistaraśo	mayā
tvattaḥ	kamala-patrākṣa
māhātmyam	api	cāvyayam
bhava—
appearance;	
apyayau—
disappearance;	
hi—
certainly;	
bhūtānām—
of
all	living	entities;	
śrutau—
have	heard;	
vistaraśaḥ—
detail;	
mayā—
by	me;
tvattaḥ—
from	You;	
kamala-patrākṣa
—O	lotus-eyed	one;	
māhātmyam
—
glories;	
api—
also;	
ca—
and;	
avyayam—
inexhaustible.
TRANSLATION
O	lotus-eyed	one,	I	have	heard	from	You	in	detail	about	the	appearance
and	disappearance	of	every	living	entity,	as	realized	through	Your
inexhaustible	glories.
PURPORT
Arjuna	addresses	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	as	"lotus-eyed"	(Kṛṣṇa's	eyes	appear	just	like
the	petals	of	a	lotus	flower)	out	of	his	joy,	for	Kṛṣṇa	has	assured	him,	in	the
last	verse	of	the	previous	chapter,	that	He	sustains	the	entire	universe	with	just
a	fragment	of	Himself.	He	is	the	source	of	everything	in	this	material
manifestation,	and	Arjuna	has	heard	of	this	from	the	Lord	in	detail.	Arjuna
further	knows	that	in	spite	of	His	being	the	source	of	all	appearances	and
disappearances,	He	is	aloof	from	them.	His	personality	is	not	lost,	although	He
is	all-pervading.	That	is	the	inconceivable	opulence	of	Kṛṣṇa	which	Arjuna
admits	that	he	has	thoroughly	understood.
TEXT	3
ए व म े त ሱ थ ा ᇰ थ
	
ᇰ व म ा ᇰ म ा न ं
	
प र म े ᇽ व र
	
।
द ् र ᇾ ट ु ि म ᇫ छ ा ि म
	
त े
	
ኅ प म ै ᇽ व र ं
	
प ु ኄ ष ो ሧ म
	
॥
३
॥evam	etad	yathāttha
tvam	ātmānaṁ	parameśvara
draṣṭum	icchāmi	te	rūpam
aiśvaraṁ	puruṣottama
evam—
that;	
etat—
this;	
yathāttha—
as	it	is;	
tvam—
You;
	ātmānam—
the	soul;
parameśvara—
the	Supreme	Lord;	
draṣṭum—
to	see;	
icchāmi—
I	wish;	
te—
You;
rūpam—
form;	
aiśvaram—
divine;	
puruṣottama
—O	best	of	personalities.
TRANSLATION
O	greatest	of	all	personalities,	O	supreme	form,	though	I	see	here
before	me	Your	actual	position,	I	yet	wish	to	see	how	You	have	entered
into	this	cosmic	manifestation.	I	want	to	see	that	form	of	Yours.
PURPORT
The	Lord	said	that	because	He	entered	into	the	material	universe	by	His
personal	representation,	the	cosmic	manifestation	has	been	made	possible	and
is	going	on.	Now	as	far	as	Arjuna	is	concerned,	he	is	inspired	by	the
statements	of	Kṛṣṇa,	but	in	order	to	convince	others	in	the	future	who	may
think	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	an	ordinary	person,	he	desires	to	see	Him	actually	in	His
universal	form,	to	see	how	He	is	acting	from	within	the	universe,	although	He
is	apart	from	it.	Arjuna's	asking	the	Lord's	permission	is	also	significant.	Since
the	Lord	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	He	is	present	within	Arjuna
himself;	therefore	He	knows	the	desire	of	Arjuna,	and	He	can	understand	that
Arjuna	has	no	special	desire	to	see	Him	in	His	universal	form,	for	he	is
completely	satisfied	to	see	Him	in	His	personal	form	of	Kṛṣṇa.	But	He	can
understand	also	that	Arjuna	wants	to	see	the	universal	form	to	convince
others.	He	did	not	have	any	personal	desire	for	confirmation.	Kṛṣṇa	also
understands	that	Arjuna	wants	to	see	the	universal	form	to	set	a	criterion,	for
in	the	future	there	would	be	so	many	imposters	who	would	pose	themselves	as
incarnations	of	God.	The	people,	therefore,	should	be	careful;	one	who	claims
to	be	Kṛṣṇa	should	be	prepared	to	show	his	universal	form	to	confirm	his
claim	to	the	people.TEXT	4
म ᇳ य स े
	
य ि द
	
त ᇫ छ ᇧ य ं
	
म य ा
	
द ् र ᇾ ट ु ि म ि त
	
प ् र भ ो
	
।
य ो ग े ᇽ व र
	
त त ो
	
म े
	
ᇰ व ं
	
द श ᆼ य ा ᇰ म ा न म ᇼ य य म ्
	
॥
४
॥
manyase	yadi	tac	chakyaṁ
mayā	draṣṭum	iti	prabho
yogeśvara	tato	me	tvaṁ
darśayātmānam	avyayam
manyase—
if	You	think;	
yadi—
if;	
tat—
that;	
śakyam—
able	to	see;	
mayā—
by
me;	
draṣṭum—
to	see;	
iti—
thus;	
prabho
—O	Lord;	
yogeśvara—
the	Lord	of	all
mystic	power;	
tataḥ—
then;	
me—
unto	me;	
tvam—
You;
	darśaya—
show;
ātmānam—
Yourself;	
avyayam—
eternal.
TRANSLATION
If	You	think	that	I	am	able	to	behold	Your	cosmic	form,	O	my	Lord,	O
master	of	all	mystic	power,	then	kindly	show	me	that	universal	self.
PURPORT
It	is	said	that	one	can	neither	see,	hear,	understand	nor	perceive	the
Supreme	Lord,	Kṛṣṇa,	by	the	material	senses.	But	if	one	is	engaged	in	loving
transcendental	service	to	the	Lord	from	the	beginning,	then	one	can	see	the
Lord	by	revelation.	Every	living	entity	is	only	a	spiritual	spark;	therefore	it	is
not	possible	to	see	or	to	understand	the	Supreme	Lord.	Arjuna,	as	a	devotee,
does	not	depend	on	his	speculative	strength;	rather,	he	admits	his	limitations
as	a	living	entity	and	acknowledges	Kṛṣṇa's	inestimable	position.	Arjuna	could
understand	that	for	a	living	entity	it	is	not	possible	to	understand	the	unlimited
infinite.	If	the	infinite	reveals	Himself,	then	it	is	possible	to	understand	the
nature	of	the	infinite	by	the	grace	of	the	infinite.	The	word	
yogeśvara	
is	also
very	significant	here	because	the	Lord	has	inconceivable	power.	If	He	likes,
He	can	reveal	Himself	by	His	grace,	although	He	is	unlimited.	Therefore
Arjuna	pleads	for	the	inconceivable	grace	of	Kṛṣṇa.	He	does	not	give	Kṛṣṇaorders.	Kṛṣṇa	is	not	obliged	to	reveal	Himself	to	anyone	unless	one	surrenders
fully	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	engages	in	devotional	service.	Thus	it	is	not
possible	for	persons	who	depend	on	the	strength	of	their	mental	speculations
to	see	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	5
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
प ᇽ य
	
म े
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
ኅ प ा ि ण
	
श त श ो ऽ थ
	
स ह स ् र श ः
	
।
न ा न ा ि व ध ा ि न
	
ि द ᇼ य ा ि न
	
न ा न ा व ण ा ᆼ क ृ त ी ि न
	
च
	
॥
५
॥
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
paśya	me	pārtha	rūpāṇi
śataśo	'tha	sahasraśaḥ
nānā-vidhāni	divyāni
nānā-varṇākṛtīni	ca
śrī	bhagavān
	
uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
paśya
—
just	see;	
me—
Mine;	
pārtha—
O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
rūpāṇi—
forms;	
śataśaḥ
—
hundreds;	
atha
—also;	
sahasraśaḥ
—thousands;	
nānā-vidhāni
—variegated;
divyāni—	
divine;	
nānā
—variegated;	
varṇa
—colored;	
akṛtīni
—forms;	
ca
—
also.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	My	dear	Arjuna,	O	son	of	Pṛthā,	behold	now
My	opulences,	hundreds	of	thousands	of	varied	divine	forms,
multicolored	like	the	sea.
PURPORT
Arjuna	wanted	to	see	Kṛṣṇa	in	His	universal	form,	which,	although	a
transcendental	form,	is	just	manifested	for	the	cosmic	manifestation	and	is
therefore	subject	to	the	temporary	time	of	this	material	nature.	As	the	material
nature	is	manifested	and	not	manifested,	similarly	this	universal	form	of	Kṛṣṇais	manifested	and	unmanifested.	It	is	not	eternally	situated	in	the	spiritual	sky
like	Kṛṣṇa's	other	forms.	As	far	as	a	devotee	is	concerned,	he	is	not	eager	to
see	the	universal	form,	but	because	Arjuna	wanted	to	see	Kṛṣṇa	in	this	way,
Kṛṣṇa	reveals	this	form.	This	universal	form	is	not	possible	to	be	seen	by	any
ordinary	man.	Kṛṣṇa	must	give	one	the	power	to	see	it.
TEXT	6
प ᇽ य ा ि द ᇰ य ा ᇳ व स ू न ् ኄ द ् र ा न ि ᇽ व न ौ
	
म ኄ त ᇿ त थ ा
	
।
ब ह ू ᇳ य द ृ ᇾ ट प ू व ा ᆼ ि ण
	
प ᇽ य ा ᇽ च य ा ᆼ ि ण
	
भ ा र त
	
॥
६
॥
paśyādityān	vasūn	rudrān
aśvinau	marutas	tathā
bahūny	adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi
paśyāścaryāṇi	bhārata
paśya—
see;	
ādityān—
the	twelve	sons	of	Aditi;	
vasūn—
the	eight	Vasus;
rudrān
—the	eleven	forms	of	Rudra;	
aśvinau
—the	two	Asvins;	
marutaḥ—
the
forty-nine	Maruts	(demigods	of	the	wind);	
tathā
—also;	
bahūni—
many;	
adṛṣṭa
—that	you	have	not	heard	or	seen;	
pūrvāṇi
—before;	
paśya
—there	see;
āścaryāṇi
—all	the	wonderful;	
bhārata—
O	best	of	the	Bhāratas.
TRANSLATION
O	best	of	the	Bhāratas,	see	here	the	different	manifestations	of	Ādityas,
Rudras,	and	all	the	demigods.	Behold	the	many	things	which	no	one	has
ever	seen	or	heard	before.
PURPORT
Even	though	Arjuna	was	a	personal	friend	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	the	most	advanced
of	learned	men,	it	was	still	not	possible	for	him	to	know	everything	about
Kṛṣṇa.	Here	it	is	stated	that	humans	have	neither	heard	nor	known	of	all	these
forms	and	manifestations.	Now	Kṛṣṇa	reveals	these	wonderful	forms.TEXT	7
इ ह ै क ᇿ थ ं
	
ज ग ᇰ क ृ ᇰ ᇿ न ं
	
प ᇽ य ा ሱ
	
स च र ा च र म ्
	
।
म म
	
द े ह े
	
ग ु ड ा क े श
	
य ᇫ च ा ᇳ य ራ ् र ᇾ ट ु ि म ᇫ छ ि स
	
॥
७
॥
ihaikasthaṁ	jagat	kṛtsnaṁ
paśyādya	sa-carācaram
mama	dehe	guḍākeśa
yac	cānyad	draṣṭum	icchasi
iha—
in	this;	
ekastham—
in	one;	
jagat—
the	universe;	
kṛtsnam—
completely;
paśya—
see;	
adya—
immediately;	
sa—
with;	
cara—
moving;	
acaram—
not
moving;	
mama—
My;
	dehe—
in	this	body;	
guḍākeśa
—O	Arjuna;	
yat—
that;	
ca
—	
also;	
anyat—
other;	
draṣṭum—
to	see;	
icchasi—
you	like.
TRANSLATION
Whatever	you	wish	to	see	can	be	seen	all	at	once	in	this	body.	This
universal	form	can	show	you	all	that	you	now	desire,	as	well	as	whatever
you	may	desire	in	the	future.	Everything	is	here	completely.
PURPORT
No	one	can	see	the	entire	universe	sitting	in	one	place.	Even	the	most
advanced	scientist	cannot	see	what	is	going	on	in	other	parts	of	the	universe.
Kṛṣṇa	gives	him	the	power	to	see	anything	he	wants	to	see,	past,	present	and
future.	Thus	by	the	mercy	of	Kṛṣṇa,	Arjuna	is	able	to	see	everything.
TEXT	8
न
	
त ु
	
म ा ं
	
श ᇧ य स े
	
द ् र ᇾ ट ु म न े न ै व
	
ᇿ व च ᇤ ु ष ा
	
।
ि द ᇼ य ं
	
द द ा ि म
	
त े
	
च ᇤ ु ः
	
प ᇽ य
	
म े
	
य ो ग म ै ᇽ व र म ्
	
॥
८
॥
na	tu	māṁ	śakyase	draṣṭum
anenaiva	sva-cakṣuṣādivyaṁ	dadāmi	te	cakṣuḥ
paśya	me	yogam	aiśvaram
na—
never;	
tu—
but;	
mām—
Me;	
śakyase—
able;	
draṣṭum—
to	see;	
anena—
by	this;	
eva—
certainly;	
sva-cakṣuṣā—
with	your	own	eyes;	
divyam—
divine;
dadāmi—
I	give;	
te—
you;
	cakṣuḥ—
eyes;	
paśya—
see;	
me—
My;	
yogam
aiśvaram—
inconceivable	mystic	power.
TRANSLATION
But	you	cannot	see	Me	with	your	present	eyes.	Therefore	I	give	to	you
divine	eyes	by	which	you	can	behold	My	mystic	opulence.
PURPORT
A	pure	devotee	does	not	like	to	see	Kṛṣṇa	in	any	form	except	His	form	with
two	hands;	a	devotee	must	see	His	universal	form	by	His	grace,	not	with	the
mind	but	with	spiritual	eyes.	To	see	the	universal	form	of	Kṛṣṇa,	Arjuna	is	told
not	to	change	his	mind	but	his	vision.	The	universal	form	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	not	very
important;	that	will	be	clear	in	the	verses.	Yet	because	Arjuna	wanted	to	see	it,
the	Lord	gives	him	the	particular	vision	required	to	see	that	universal	form.
Devotees	who	are	correctly	situated	in	a	transcendental	relationship	with
Kṛṣṇa	are	attracted	by	loving	features,	not	by	a	godless	display	of	opulences.
The	playmates	of	Kṛṣṇa,	the	friends	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	the	parents	of	Kṛṣṇa	never
want	Kṛṣṇa	to	show	His	opulences.	They	are	so	immersed	in	pure	love	that
they	do	not	even	know	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	In
their	loving	exchange	they	forget	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	theSupreme	Lord.	In	the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
it	is	stated	that	the	boys	who	play	with	Kṛṣṇa	are	all
highly	pious	souls,	and	after	many,	many	births	they	are	able	to	play	with
Kṛṣṇa.	Such	boys	do	not	know	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.	They	take	Him	as	a	personal	friend.	The	Supreme	Person	is
considered	as	the	impersonal	Brahman	by	great	sages,	as	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead	by	the	devotees,	and	as	a	product	of	this	material
nature	by	ordinary	men.	The	fact	is	that	the	devotee	is	not	concerned	to	see	the
viśva-rūpa,	
the	universal	form,	but	Arjuna	wanted	to	see	it	to	substantiate
Kṛṣṇa's	statement	so	that	in	the	future	people	could	understand	that	Kṛṣṇa	notonly	theoretically	or	philosophically	presented	Himself	as	the	Supreme	but
actually	presented	Himself	as	such	to	Arjuna.	Arjuna	must	confirm	this
because	Arjuna	is	the	beginning	of	the	
paramparā	
system.	Those	who	are
actually	interested	to	understand	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,
and	who	follow	in	the	footsteps	of	Arjuna	should	understand	that	Kṛṣṇa	not
only	theoretically	presented	Himself	as	the	Supreme,	but	actually	revealed
Himself	as	the	Supreme.
The	Lord	gave	Arjuna	the	necessary	power	to	see	His	universal	form
because	He	knew	that	Arjuna	did	not	particularly	want	to	see	it,	as	we	have
already	explained.
TEXT	9
स ᇮ ज य
	
उ व ा च
	
।
ए व म ु ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
त त ो
	
र ा ज ᇳ म ह ा य ो ग े ᇽ व र ो
	
ह ि र ः
	
।
द श ᆼ य ा म ा स
	
प ा थ ा ᆼ य
	
प र म ं
	
ኅ प म ै ᇽ व र म ्
	
॥
९
॥
sañjaya	uvāca
evam	uktvā	tato	rājan
mahā-yogeśvaro	hariḥ
darśayāmāsa	pārthāya
paramaṁ	rūpam	aiśvaram
sañjayaḥ	uvāca—
Sanjaya	said;	
evam—
thus;	
uktvā
—saying;	
tataḥ
—
thereafter;	
rājan
—O	King;	
mahā-yogeśvaraḥ—
the	most	powerful	mystic;
hariḥ
—the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa;	
darśayāmāsa—
showed;
pārthāya—
unto	Arjuna;	
paramam
—divine;	
rūpam
—universal	form;	
aiśvaram
—	opulences.
TRANSLATION
Sañjaya	said:	O	King,	speaking	thus,	the	Supreme,	the	Lord	of	all
mystic	power,	the	Personality	of	Godhead,	displayed	His	universal	form
to	Arjuna.TEXTS	10-11
अ न े क व ᇧ त ् र न य न म न े क ा द ् भ ु त द श ᆼ न म ्
	
।
अ न े क ि द ᇼ य ा भ र ण ं
	
ि द ᇼ य ा न े क ो ሱ त ा य ु ध म ्
	
॥
१ ०
॥
ि द ᇼ य म ा ᇺ य ा ᇸ ब र ध र ं
	
ि द ᇼ य ग ᇳ ध ा न ु ल े प न म ्
	
।
स व ा ᆼ ᇽ च य ᆼ म य ं
	
द े व म न ᇳ त ं
	
ि व ᇽ व त ो म ु ख म ्
	
॥
१ १
॥
aneka-vaktra-nayanam
anekādbhuta-darśanam
aneka-divyābharaṇaṁ
divyānekodyatāyudham
divya-mālyāmbara-dharaṁ
divya-gandhānulepanam
sarvāścarya-mayaṁ	devam
anantaṁ	viśvato-mukham
aneka—
various;	
vaktra—
mouths;	
nayanam—
eyes;	
aneka—
various;
adbhuta—
wonderful;	
darśanam—
sight;	
aneka—
many;	
divya—
divine;
ābharaṇam—
ornaments;	
divya—
divine;	
aneka—
various;	
udyata—
uplifted;
āyudham
	weapons;	
divya—
divine;	
mālya
—garlands;	
ambara-dharam
—
covered	with	the	dresses;	
divya
—divine;	
gandha—
fragrance;	
anulepanam
—
smeared;	
sarva
—	all;	
aścaryamayam
—wonderful;	
devam
—shining;	
anantam
—unlimited;	
viśvataḥ-mukham
—all-pervading.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	saw	in	that	universal	form	unlimited	mouths	and	unlimited
eyes.	It	was	all	wondrous.	The	form	was	decorated	with	divine,	dazzling
ornaments	and	arrayed	in	many	garbs.	He	was	garlanded	gloriously,	and
there	were	many	scents	smeared	over	His	body.	All	was	magnificent,	all-
expanding,	unlimited.	This	was	seen	by	Arjuna.
PURPORT
These	two	verses	indicate	that	there	is	no	limit	to	the	hands,	mouths,	legs,etc.,	of	the	Lord.	These	manifestations	are	distributed	throughout	the	universe
and	are	unlimited.	By	the	grace	of	the	Lord,	Arjuna	could	see	them	while
sitting	in	one	place.	That	is	due	to	the	inconceivable	potency	of	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	12
ि द ि व
	
स ू य ᆼ स ह स ् र ᇿ य
	
भ व े ሱ ु ग प द ु ि ᇰ थ त ा
	
।
य ि द
	
भ ा ः
	
स द ृ श ी
	
स ा
	
ᇿ य ा द ् भ ा स ᇿ त ᇿ य
	
म ह ा ᇰ म न ः
	
॥
१ २
॥
divi	sūrya-sahasrasya
bhaved	yugapad	utthitā
yadi	bhāḥ	sadṛśī	sā	syād
bhāsas	tasya	mahātmanaḥ
divi—
in	the	sky;	
sūrya
—sun;	
sahasrasya—
of	many	thousands;	
bhavet—
there	were;	
yugapat—
simultaneously;	
utthitā—
present;	
yadi—
if;	
bhāḥ—
light;
sadṛśī—
like	that;	
sā
—that;	
syāt—
may	be;	
bhāsaḥ—
effulgence;	
tasya—
there
is
;	mahātmanaḥ—
of	the	great	Lord.
TRANSLATION
If	hundreds	of	thousands	of	suns	rose	up	at	once	into	the	sky,	they
might	resemble	the	effulgence	of	the	Supreme	Person	in	that	universal
form.
PURPORT
What	Arjuna	saw	was	indescribable,	yet	Sañjaya	is	trying	to	give	a	mental
picture	of	that	great	revelation	to	Dhṛtarāṣṭra.	Neither	Sañjaya	nor	Dhṛtarāṣṭra
were	present,	but	Sañjaya,	by	the	grace	of	Vyāsa,	could	see	whatever
happened.	Thus	he	now	compares	the	situation,	as	far	as	it	can	be	understood,
to	an	imaginable	phenomenon	(i.e.	thousands	of	suns).
TEXT	13त त ् र ै क ᇿ थ ं
	
ज ग ᇰ क ृ ᇰ ᇿ न ं
	
प ् र ि व भ ᇧ त म न े क ध ा
	
।
अ प ᇽ य ራ े व द े व ᇿ य
	
श र ी र े
	
प ा ᇯ ड व ᇿ त द ा
	
॥
१ ३
॥
tatraikasthaṁ	jagat	kṛtsnaṁ
pravibhaktam	anekadhā
apaśyad	deva-devasya
śarīre	pāṇḍavas	tadā
tatra—
there;	
ekastham—
one	place;	
jagat—
universe;	
kṛtsnam—
completely;
pravibhaktam—
divided	in;	
anekadhā—
many	kinds;	
apaśyat—
could	see;	
deva-
devasya—
of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead;	
śarīre—
in	the	universal
form;	
pāṇḍavaḥ—
Arjuna;	
tadā
—at	that	time.
TRANSLATION
At	that	time	Arjuna	could	see	in	the	universal	form	of	the	Lord	the
unlimited	expansions	of	the	universe	situated	in	one	place	although
divided	into	many,	many	thousands.
PURPORT
The	word	
tatra
	(there)	is	very	significant.	It	indicates	that	both	Arjuna	and
Kṛṣṇa	were	sitting	on	the	chariot	when	Arjuna	saw	the	universal	form.	Others
on	the	battlefield	could	not	see	this	form	because	Kṛṣṇa	gave	the	vision	only
to	Arjuna.	Arjuna	could	see	in	the	body	of	Kṛṣṇa	many	thousands	of
universes.	As	we	learn	from	Vedic	scriptures,	there	are	many	universes	and
many	planets.	Some	of	them	are	made	of	earth,	some	are	made	of	gold,	some
are	made	of	jewels,	some	are	very	great,	some	are	not	so	great,	etc.	Sitting	on
his	chariot,	Arjuna	could	see	all	these	universes.	But	no	one	could	understand
what	was	going	on	between	Arjuna	and	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	14
त त ः
	
स
	
ि व ᇿ म य ा ि व ᇾ ट ो
	
ᇦ ᇾ ट र ो म ा
	
ध न ᇮ ज य ः
	
।
प ् र ण ᇸ य
	
ि श र स ा
	
द े व ं
	
क ृ त ा ᇮ ज ि ल र भ ा ष त
	
॥
१ ४
॥tataḥ	sa	vismayāviṣṭo
hṛṣṭa-romā	dhanañjayaḥ
praṇamya	śirasā	devaṁ
kṛtāñjalir	abhāṣata
tataḥ—
thereafter;	
saḥ
—he;	
vismayāviṣṭaḥ—
being	overwhelmed	with
wonder;	
hṛṣṭa-romā—
with	his	bodily	hairs	standing	on	end	due	to	his	great
ecstasy;	
dhanañjayaḥ—
Arjuna	;	
praṇamya—
offering	obeisances;	
śirasā—
with
the	head;	
devam—
to	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead;	
kṛtāñjaliḥ—	
with
folded	hands;	
abhāṣata—
began	to	say.
TRANSLATION
Then,	bewildered	and	astonished,	his	hair	standing	on	end,	Arjuna
began	to	pray	with	folded	hands,	offering	obeisances	to	the	Supreme
Lord.
PURPORT
Once	the	divine	vision	is	revealed,	the	relationship	between	Kṛṣṇa	and
Arjuna	changes	immediately.	Before,	Kṛṣṇa	and	Arjuna	had	a	relationship
based	on	friendship,	but	here,	after	the	revelation,	Arjuna	is	offering
obeisances	with	great	respect,	and	with	folded	hands	he	is	praying	to	Kṛṣṇa.
He	is	praising	the	universal	form.	Thus	Arjuna's	relationship	becomes	one	of
wonder	rather	than	friendship.	Great	devotees	see	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	reservoir	of	all
relationships.	In	the	scriptures	there	are	twelve	basic	kinds	of	relationships
mentioned,	and	all	of	them	are	present	in	Kṛṣṇa.	It	is	said	that	He	is	the	ocean
of	all	the	relationships	exchanged	between	two	living	entities,	between	the
gods,	or	between	the	Supreme	Lord	and	His	devotees.
It	is	said	that	Arjuna	was	inspired	by	the	relationship	of	wonder,	and	in	that
wonder,	although	he	was	by	nature	very	sober,	calm	and	quiet,	he	became
ecstatic,	his	hair	stood	up,	and	he	began	to	offer	his	obeisances	unto	the
Supreme	Lord	with	folded	hands.	He	was	not,	of	course,	afraid.	He	was
affected	by	the	wonders	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	The	immediate	context	is
wonder;	his	natural	loving	friendship	was	overwhelmed	by	wonder,	and	thus
he	reacted	in	this	way.TEXT	15
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
	
प ᇽ य ा ि म
	
द े व ा ं ᇿ त व
	
द े व
	
द े ह े
	
स व ा ᆾ ᇿ त थ ा
	
भ ू त ि व श े ष स ङ ् घ ा न ्
	
।
	
ब ् र ቊ ा ण म ी श ं
	
क म ल ा स न ᇿ थ
-	
म ृ ष ी ं ᇽ च
	
स व ा ᆼ न ु र ग ा ं ᇽ च
	
ि द ᇼ य ा न ्
	
॥
१ ५
॥
arjuna	uvāca
paśyāmi	devāṁs	tava	deva	dehe
sarvāṁs	tathā	bhūta-viśeṣa-saṅghān
brahmāṇam	īśaṁ	kamalāsana-stham
ṛṣīṁś	ca	sarvān	uragāṁś	ca	divyān
arjunaḥ	uvāca
—Arjuna	said;	
paśyāmi
—I	see;	
devān
—all	the	demigods;
tava
—Your;	
deva
—O	Lord;	
dehe
—in	the	body;	
sarvān
—all;	
tathā
—also;
bhūta
—living	entities;	
viśeṣa-saṅghān
—specifically	assembled;	
brahmāṇam
—	Lord	Brahmā;	
īśam
—Lord	Śiva;	
kamala-āsana-stham
—sitting	on	the	lotus
flower;	
ṛṣīn
—great	sages;	
ca—
also;	
sarvān—
all;	
uragān
—serpents;	
ca
—also;
divyān
—divine.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	said:	My	dear	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	I	see	assembled	together	in	Your
body	all	the	demigods	and	various	other	living	entities.	I	see	Brahmā
sitting	on	the	lotus	flower	as	well	as	Lord	Śiva	and	many	sages	and	divine
serpents.
PURPORT
Arjuna	sees	everything	in	the	universe;	therefore	he	sees	Brahmā,	who	is
the	first	creature	in	the	universe,	and	the	celestial	serpent	upon	which	the
Garbhodakaśāyī	Viṣṇu	lies	in	the	lower	regions	of	the	universe.	This	snake
bed	is	called	Vāsuki.	There	are	also	other	snakes	known	as	Vāsuki.	Arjuna	can
see	from	the	Garbhodakaśāyī	Viṣṇu	up	to	the	topmost	part	of	the	universe	onthe	lotus-flower	planet	where	Brahmā,	the	first	creature	of	the	universe,
resides.	That	means	that	from	the	beginning	to	the	end,	everything	could	be
seen	by	Arjuna	sitting	in	one	place	on	his	chariot.	This	was	possible	by	the
grace	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	16
अ न े क ब ा ह ू द र व ᇧ त ् र न े त ् र ं
	
प ᇽ य ा ि म
	
ᇰ व ा ं
	
स व ᆼ त ो ऽ न ᇳ त ኅ प म ्
	
।
	
न ा ᇳ त ं
	
न
	
म ᇲ य ं
	
न
	
प ु न ᇿ त व ा ि द ं
	
प ᇽ य ा ि म
	
ि व ᇽ व े ᇽ व र
	
ि व ᇽ व ኅ प
	
॥
१ ६
॥
aneka-bāhūdara-vaktra-netraṁ
paśyāmi	tvāṁ	sarvato	'nanta-rūpam
nāntaṁ	na	madhyaṁ	na	punas	tavādiṁ
paśyāmi	viśveśvara	viśva-rūpa
aneka—
many;	
bāhū—
arms;	
udara—
bellies;	
vaktra—
mouths;	
netram—
eyes;	
paśyāmi—
I	see;	
tvām—
unto	You;	
sarvataḥ—
from	all	sides;	
ananta-
rūpam—
unlimited	form;	
na	antam—
there	is	no	end;	
na	madhyam—
there	is	no
middle;	
na	punaḥ—
nor	again;	
tava—
Your;	
ādim—
beginning;	
paśyāmi—	
I	see;
viśveśvara
—O	Lord	of	the	universe;	
viṣva-rūpa—
in	the	form	of	the	universe.
TRANSLATION
O	Lord	of	the	universe,	I	see	in	Your	universal	body	many,	many	forms
—bellies,	mouths,	eyes—expanded	without	limit.	There	is	no	end,	there	is
no	beginning,	and	there	is	no	middle	to	all	this.
PURPORT
Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	and	is	unlimited;	thus	through
Him	everything	could	be	seen.
TEXT	17ि क र ी ि ट न ं
	
ग ि द न ं
	
च ि क ् र ण ं
	
च
	
त े ज ो र ा ि श ं
	
स व ᆼ त ो
	
द ी ि ᇴ त म ᇳ त म ्
	
।
	
प ᇽ य ा ि म
	
ᇰ व ा ं
	
द ु ि न ᆼ र ी ቎ य ं
	
स म ᇳ त ा
-	
ራ ी ᇴ त ा न ल ा क ᆼ ሱ ु ि त म प ् र म े य म ्
	
॥
१ ७
॥
kirīṭinaṁ	gadinaṁ	cakriṇaṁ	ca
tejo-rāśiṁ	sarvato	dīptimantam
paśyāmi	tvāṁ	durnirīkṣyaṁ	samantād
dīptānalārka-dyutim	aprameyam
kirīṭinam
—with	helmets;	
gadinam
—with	maces;	
cakriṇam
—with	discs;	
ca
—and;	
tejorāśim—
effulgence;	
sarvataḥ—
all	sides;	
dīptimantam—
glowing;
pasyāmi—
I	see;	
tvām—
You;
	durnirīkṣyam—
difficult	to	see;	
samantāt—
spreading;	
dīpta-anala—
blazing	fire;	
arka—
sun;	
dyutim
—sunshine;
aprameyam
—immeasurable.
TRANSLATION
Your	form,	adorned	with	various	crowns,	clubs	and	discs,	is	difficult	to
see	because	of	its	glaring	effulgence,	which	is	fiery	and	immeasurable	like
the	sun.
TEXT	18
ᇰ व म ᇤ र ं
	
प र म ं
	
व े ि द त ᇼ य ं
	
ᇰ व म ᇿ य
	
ि व ᇽ व ᇿ य
	
प र ं
	
ि न ध ा न म ्
	
।
	
ᇰ व म ᇼ य य ः
	
श ा ᇽ व त ध म ᆼ ग ो ᇴ त ा
	
स न ा त न ᇿ ᇰ व ं
	
प ु ኄ ष ो
	
म त ो
	
म े
	
॥
१ ८
॥
tvam	akṣaraṁ	paramaṁ	veditavyaṁ
tvam	asya	viśvasya	paraṁ	nidhānam
tvam	avyayaḥ	śāśvata-dharma-goptā
sanātanas	tvaṁ	puruṣo	mato	me
tvam—
You;
	akṣaram—
inexhaustible;	
paramam—
supreme;	
veditavyam—
tobe	understood;	
tvam—
You;
	asya—
of	this;	
viśvasya—
of	the	universe;	
param
—
supreme;	
nidhānam—
basis;	
tvam—
You	are;	
avyayaḥ—
inexhaustible;
śāśvata-dharma-goptā—
maintainer	of	the	eternal	religion;	
sanātanaḥ—
eternal;	
tvam—
You;
	puruṣaḥ—
Supreme	Personality;	
mataḥ	me—
ismy	opinion.
TRANSLATION
You	are	the	supreme	primal	objective;	You	are	the	best	in	all	the
universes;	You	are	inexhaustible,	and	You	are	the	oldest;	You	are	the
maintainer	of	religion,	the	eternal	Personality	of	Godhead.
TEXT	19
अ न ा ि द म ᇲ य ा ᇳ त म न ᇳ त व ी य ᆼ
-	
म न ᇳ त ब ा ह ु ं
	
श ि श स ू य ᆼ न े त ् र म ्
	
।
	
प ᇽ य ा ि म
	
ᇰ व ा ं
	
द ी ᇴ त ह ु त ा श व ᇧ त ् र ं
	
ᇿ व त े ज स ा
	
ि व ᇽ व ि म द ं
	
त प ᇳ त म ्
	
॥
१ ९
॥
anādi-madhyāntam	ananta-vīryam
ananta-bāhuṁ	śaśi-sūrya-netram
paśyāmi	tvāṁ	dīpta-hutāśa-vaktraṁ
sva-tejasā	viśvam	idaṁ	tapantam
anādi—
without	beginning;	
madhya—
without	middle;	
antam—
without	end;
ananta—
unlimited;	
vīryam—
glorious;	
ananta—
unlimited;	
bāhum—
arms;	
śaśi
—
moon;	
sūrya—
sun;	
netram—
eyes;	
paśyāmi
—I	see;	
tvām
—You;	
dīpta—
blazing;	
hutāśa-vaktram—
fire	coming	out	of	Your	mouth;	
sva-tejasā—
by
Your;	
viśvam—
this	universe;	
idam—
this;	
tapantam—
heating.
TRANSLATION
You	are	the	origin	without	beginning,	middle	or	end.	You	have
numberless	arms,	and	the	sun	and	moon	are	among	Your	great	unlimited
eyes.	By	Your	own	radiance	You	are	heating	this	entire	universe.PURPORT
There	is	no	limit	to	the	extent	of	the	six	opulences	of	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.	Here	and	in	many	other	places	there	is	repetition,	but
according	to	the	scriptures,	repetition	of	the	glories	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	not	a	literary
weakness.	It	is	said	that	at	a	time	of	bewilderment	or	wonder	or	of	great
ecstasy,	statements	are	repeated	over	and	over.	That	is	not	a	flaw.
TEXT	20
ሱ ा व ा प ृ ि थ ᇼ य ो ि र द म ᇳ त र ं
	
ि ह
	
ᇼ य ा ᇴ त ं
	
ᇰ व य ै क े न
	
ि द श ᇽ च
	
स व ा ᆼ ः
	
।
	
द ृ ᇾ ट ् व ा द ् भ ु त ं
	
ኅ प म ु ग ् र ं
	
त व े द ं
	
ल ो क त ् र य ं
	
प ् र ᇼ य ि थ त ं
	
म ह ा ᇰ म न ्
	
॥
२ ०
॥
dyāv	āpṛthivyor	idam	antaraṁ	hi
vyāptaṁ	tvayaikena	diśaś	ca	sarvāḥ
dṛṣṭvādbhutaṁ	rūpam	ugraṁ	tavedaṁ
loka-trayaṁ	pravyathitaṁ	mahātman
dyau—
in	outer	space;	
āpṛthivyoḥ—
of	the	earth;	
idam—
this;	
antaram—
in
between;	
hi—
certainly;	
vyāptam
—pervaded;	
tvayā—
by	You;	
ekena—
by	one;
diśaḥ—
directions;	
ca—
and;	
sarvāḥ—
all;	
dṛṣṭvā—
by	seeing;	
adbhutam—
wonderful;	
rūpam—
form;	
ugram—
terrible;	
tava—
Your;	
idam—
this;	
loka
—
planetary	system;	
trayam—
three;	
pravyathitam
—perturbed;	
mahātman
—O
great	one.
TRANSLATION
Although	You	are	one,	You	are	spread	throughout	the	sky	and	the
planets	and	all	space	between.	O	great	one,	as	I	behold	this	terrible	form,
I	see	that	all	the	planetary	systems	are	perplexed.
PURPORTDyāv	āpṛthivyoḥ	
(the	space	between	heaven	and	earth)	and	
lokatrayam
(three	worlds)	are	significant	words	in	this	verse	because	it	appears	that	not
only	Arjuna	saw	this	universal	form	of	the	Lord,	but	others	in	other	planetary
systems	also	saw	it.	The	vision	was	not	a	dream.	All	who	were	spiritually
awake	with	the	divine	vision	saw	it.
TEXT	21
अ म ी
	
ि ह
	
ᇰ व ा ं
	
स ु र स ङ ् घ ा
	
ि व श ि ᇳ त
	
क े ि च द ् भ ी त ा ः
	
प ् र ा ᇮ ज ल य ो
	
ग ृ ण ि ᇳ त
	
।
	
ᇿ व ᇿ त ी ᇰ य ु ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
म ह ि ष ᆼ ि स ሬ स ङ ् घ ा ः
	
ᇿ त ु व ि ᇳ त
	
ᇰ व ा ं
	
ᇿ त ु ि त ि भ ः
	
प ु ᇾ क ल ा ि भ ः
	
॥
२ १
॥
amī	hi	tvāṁ	sura-saṅghā	viśanti
kecid	bhītāḥ	prāñjalayo	gṛṇanti
svastīty	uktvā	maharṣi-siddha-saṅghāḥ
stuvanti	tvāṁ	stutibhiḥ	puṣkalābhiḥ
amī—
all	those;	
hi
—certainly;	
tvām—
unto	You;	
sura-saṅghāḥ—
groups	of
demigods;	
viśanti
—entering;	
kecit—
some	of	them;	
bhītāḥ—
out	of	fear;
prāñjalayaḥ—
with	folded	hands;	
gṛṇanti
—offering	prayers	unto;	
svasti—
all
peace;	
iti—
thus;	
uktvā—
speaking	like	that;	
maharṣi—
great	sages;	
siddha-
saṅghāḥ—
perfect	sages;	
stuvanti—
singing	hymns;	
tvām—
unto	You;	
stutibhiḥ
—
with	prayers;
	puṣkalābhiḥ—
Vedic	hymns.
TRANSLATION
All	the	demigods	are	surrendering	and	entering	into	You.	They	are
very	much	afraid,	and	with	folded	hands	they	are	singing	the	Vedic
hymns.
PURPORTThe	demigods	in	all	the	planetary	systems	feared	the	terrific	manifestation
of	the	universal	form	and	its	glowing	effulgence	and	so	prayed	for	protection.
TEXT	22
ኄ द ् र ा ि द ᇰ य ा
	
व स व ो
	
य े
	
च
	
स ा ᇲ य ा
	
ि व ᇽ व े ऽ ि ᇽ व न ौ
	
म ኄ त ᇽ च ो ᇾ म प ा ᇽ च
	
।
	
ग ᇳ ध व ᆼ य ᇤ ा स ु र ि स ሬ स ङ ् घ ा
	
व ी ᇤ ᇳ त े
	
ᇰ व ा ं
	
ि व ि ᇿ म त ा ᇽ च ै व
	
स व ᆹ
	
॥
२ २
॥
rudrādityā	vasavo	ye	ca	sādhyā
viśve	'śvinau	marutaś	coṣmapāś	ca
gandharva-yakṣāsura-siddha-saṅghā
vīkṣante	tvāṁ	vismitāś	caiva	sarve
rudra—
manifestations	of	Lord	Śiva;	
ādityāḥ—
the	Ādityas;	
vasavaḥ—
the
Vasus;	
ye—
all	those;	
ca—
and;	
sādhyāḥ—
the	Sādhyas;	
viśve—
the	Viśvadevas;
aśvinau—
the	Aśvinīkumāras;	
marutaḥ—
the	Maruts;	
ca—
and;	
uṣmapāḥ—
the
forefathers;	
ca—
and;	
gandharva—
the	Gandharvas;	
yakṣa—
the	Yakṣas;	
asura-
siddha—
the	demons	and	the	perfected	demigods;	
saṅghāḥ—
assemblies;
vīkṣante—
are	seeing;	
tvām—
You;
	vismitāḥ—
in	wonder;	
ca—
also;	
eva
—
certainly;	
sarve—
all.
TRANSLATION
The	different	manifestations	of	Lord	Śiva,	the	Ādityas,	the	Vasus,	the
Sādhyas,	the	Viśvadevas,	the	two	Aśvins,	the	Māruts,	the	forefathers	and
the	Gandharvas,	the	Yakṣas,	Asuras,	and	all	perfected	demigods	are
beholding	You	in	wonder.
TEXT	23
ኅ प ं
	
म ह ሧ े
	
ब ह ु व ᇧ त ् र न े त ् र ं
	
म ह ा ब ा ह ो
	
ब ह ु ब ा ह ू ኄ प ा द म ्
	
।
	
ब ह ू द र ं
	
ब ह ु द ं ᇾ ट ् र ा क र ा ल ं
	द ृ ᇾ ट ् व ा
	
ल ो क ा ः
	
प ् र ᇼ य ि थ त ा ᇿ त थ ा ह म ्
	
॥
२ ३
॥
rūpaṁ	mahat	te	bahu-vaktra-netraṁ
mahā-bāho	bahu-bāhūru-pādam
bahūdaraṁ	bahu-daṁṣṭrā-karālaṁ
dṛṣṭvā	lokāḥ	pravyathitās	tathāham
rūpam—
form;	
mahat—
very	great;	
te
—of	You;	
bahu—
many;	
vaktra
—faces;
netram
—eyes;	
mahā-bāho—
O	mighty-armed	one;	
bahu—
many;	
bāhu—
arms;
ūru
—thighs;	
pādam—
legs;	
bahu-udaram—
many	bellies;	
babu-daṁṣṭrā
—
many	teeth;	
karālam—
horrible;	
dṛṣṭvā—
seeing;	
lokāḥ—
all	the	planets;
pravyathitāḥ—
perturbed;	
tathā—
similarly;	
aham—
I.
TRANSLATION
O	mighty-armed	one,	all	the	planets	with	their	demigods	are	disturbed
at	seeing	Your	many	faces,	eyes,	arms,	bellies	and	legs	and	Your	terrible
teeth,	and	as	they	are	disturbed,	so	am	I.
TEXT	24
न भ ः ᇿ प ृ श ं
	
द ी ᇴ त म न े क व ण ᆾ
	
ᇼ य ा ሧ ा न न ं
	
द ी ᇴ त ि व श ा ल न े त ् र म ्
	
।
	
द ृ ᇾ ट ् व ा
	
ि ह
	
ᇰ व ा ं
	
प ् र ᇼ य ि थ त ा ᇳ त र ा ᇰ म ा
	
ध ृ ि त ं
	
न
	
ि व ᇳ द ा ि म
	
श म ं
	
च
	
ि व ᇾ ण ो
	
॥
२ ४
॥
nabhaḥ	spṛśaṁ	dīptam	aneka-varṇaṁ
vyāttānanaṁ	dīpta-viśāla-netram
dṛṣṭvā	hi	tvāṁ	pravyathitāntarātmā
dhṛtiṁ	na	vindāmi	śamaṁ	ca	viṣṇo
nabhaḥ	spṛśam—
touching	the	sky;	
dīptam—
glowing;	
aneka
—many;
varṇam
—color;	
vyāttā—
open;	
ānanam
—mouth;	
dīpta—
glowing;	
viśāla
—
very	great;	
netram
—eyes;	
dṛṣṭvā—
by	seeing;	
hi—
certainly;	
tvām
—You;
pravyathitā	
—perturbed;	
antaḥ
—within;	
ātmā
—soul;	
dhṛtim—
steadiness;	
na—no;	
vindāmi—
and	have;	
śamam
—mental	tranquility;	
ca
—also;	
viṣṇo
—O
Lord	Viṣṇu.
TRANSLATION
O	all-pervading	Viṣṇu,	I	can	no	longer	maintain	my	equilibrium.
Seeing	Your	radiant	colors	fill	the	skies	and	beholding	Your	eyes	and
mouths,	I	am	afraid.
TEXT	25
द ं ᇾ ट ् र ा क र ा ल ा ि न
	
च
	
त े
	
म ु ख ा ि न
	
द ृ ᇾ ट ् व ै व
	
क ा ल ा न ल स ि ᇳ न भ ा ि न
	
।
	
ि द श ो
	
न
	
ज ा न े
	
न
	
ल भ े
	
च
	
श म ᆼ
	
प ् र स ी द
	
द े व े श
	
ज ग ि ᇳ न व ा स
	
॥
२ ५
॥
daṁṣṭrā-karālāni	ca	te	mukhāni
dṛṣṭvaiva	kālānala-sannibhāni
diśo	na	jāne	na	labhe	ca	śarma
prasīda	deveśa	jagan-nivāsa
daṁṣṭrā
—teeth;	
karālāni—
like	that;	
ca—
also;	
te—
Your;	
mukhāni—
faces;
dṛṣṭvā—
seeing;	
eva—
thus;	
kālānala—
the	fire	of	death;	
sannibhāni—
as	if
blazing;	
diśaḥ—
directions;	
na	jāne—
do	not	know;	
na	labhe—
nor	obtain;	
ca
śarma—
and	grace;	
prasīda—
be	pleased;	
deveśa
—O	Lord	of	all	lords;	
jagat-
nivāsa—
refuge	of	the	worlds.
TRANSLATION
O	Lord	of	lords,	O	refuge	of	the	worlds,	please	be	gracious	to	me.	I
cannot	keep	my	balance	seeing	thus	Your	blazing	deathlike	faces	and
awful	teeth.	In	all	directions	I	am	bewildered.
TEXTS	26-27अ म ी
	
च
	
ᇰ व ा ं
	
ध ृ त र ा ᇾ ट ् र ᇿ य
	
प ु त ् र ा ः
	
स व ᆹ
	
स ह ै व ा व ि न प ा ल स ङ ् घ ै ः
	
।
	
भ ी ᇾ म ो
	
द ् र ो ण ः
	
स ू त प ु त ् र ᇿ त थ ा स ौ
	
स ह ा ᇿ म द ी य ै र ि प
	
य ो ध म ु ᇨ य ै ः
	
॥
२ ६
॥
	
व ᇧ त ् र ा ि ण
	
त े
	
ᇰ व र म ा ण ा
	
ि व श ि ᇳ त
	
द ं ᇾ ट ् र ा क र ा ल ा ि न
	
भ य ा न क ा ि न
	
।
	
क े ि च द ् ि व ल ᇩ न ा
	
द श न ा ᇳ त र े ष ु
	
स ᇳ द ृ ᇽ य ᇳ त े
	
च ू ि ण ᆼ त ै ኄ ሧ म ा ङ ् ग ै ः
	
॥
२ ७
॥
amī	ca	tvāṁ	dhṛtarāṣṭrasya	putrāḥ
sarve	sahaivāvanipāla-saṅghaiḥ
bhīṣmo	droṇaḥ	sūta-putras	tathāsau
sahāsmadīyair	api	yodha-mukhyaiḥ
vaktrāṇi	te	tvaramāṇā	viśanti
daṁṣṭrā-karālāni	bhayānakāni
kecid	vilagnā	daśanāntareṣu
sandṛśyante	cūrṇitair	uttamāṅgaiḥ
amī
—all	those;	
ca
—also;	
tvām
—You;	
dhṛtarāṣṭasya
—of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra;
putrāḥ
—sons;	
sarva
—all;	
saha	eva
—along	with;	
avanipāla
—warrior	kings;
saṅghaiḥ
—with	the	groups;	
bhīṣmaḥ
—Bhīṣmadeva;	
droṇaḥ
—Droṇācārya;
sūta-putraḥ
—Karṇa;	
tathā
—also;	
asau
—that;	
saha
—with;	
asmadīyaiḥ
—our;
api
—also;	
yodha-mukhyaiḥ
—chief	among	the	warriors;	
vaktrāṇi
—mouths;	
te
—Your;	
tvaramāṇāḥ
—fearful;	
viśanti
—entering;	
daṁṣṭrā
—teeth;	
karālāni
—
terrible;	
bhayānakāni
—very	fearful;	
kecit
—some	of	them;	
vilagnāḥ
—being
attacked;	
daśanāntareṣu
—between	the	teeth;	
sandṛśyante
—being	seen;
cūrṇitaiḥ
—smashed;	
uttama-aṅgaiḥ
—by	the	head.
TRANSLATION
All	the	sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra	along	with	their	allied	kings,	and	Bhīṣma,
Droṇa	and	Karṇa,	and	all	our	soldiers	are	rushing	into	Your	mouths,
their	heads	smashed	by	Your	fearful	teeth.	I	see	that	some	are	being
crushed	between	Your	teeth	as	well.
PURPORTIn	a	previous	verse	the	Lord	promised	to	show	Arjuna	things	he	would	by
very	interested	in	seeing.	Now	Arjuna	sees	that	the	leaders	of	the	opposite
party	(Bhīṣma,	Droṇa,	Karṇa	and	all	the	sons	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra)	and	their	soldiers
and	Arjuna's	own	soldiers	are	all	being	annihilated.	This	is	an	indication	that
Arjuna	will	emerge	victorious	in	battle,	despite	heavy	losses	on	both	sides.	It
is	also	mentioned	here	that	Bhīṣma,	who	is	supposed	to	be	unconquerable,
will	also	be	smashed.	So	also	Karṇa.	Not	only	will	the	great	warriors	of	the
other	party	like	Bhīṣma	be	smashed,	but	some	of	the	great	warriors	of	Arjuna's
side	also.
TEXT	28
य थ ा
	
न द ी न ा ं
	
ब ह व ो ऽ ᇸ ब ु व े ग ा ः
	
स म ु द ् र म े व ा ि भ म ु ख ा
	
द ् र व ि ᇳ त
	
।
	
त थ ा
	
त व ा म ी
	
न र ल ो क व ी र ा
	
ि व श ि ᇳ त
	
व ᇧ त ् र ा ᇯ य ि भ ि व ᇬ व ल ि ᇳ त
	
॥
२ ८
॥
yathā	nadīnāṁ	bahavo	'mbu-vegāḥ
samudram	evābhimukhā	dravanti
tathā	tavāmī	nara-loka-vīrā
viśanti	vaktrāṇy	abhivijvalanti
yathā—
as;	
nadīnām—
of	the	rivers;	
bahavaḥ—
many;	
ambu-vegāḥ—
waves
of	the	waters;	
samudram—
ocean;	
eva—
certainly;	
abhimukhāḥ—
towards;
dravanti—
gliding;	
tathā—
similarly;	
tava—
Your;	
amī—
all	those;	
nara-
lokavīrāḥ—
the	kings	of	human	society;	
viśanti—
entering;	
vaktrāṇi—
into	the
mouths;	
abhivijvalanti—
blazing.
TRANSLATION
As	the	rivers	flow	into	the	sea,	so	all	these	great	warriors	enter	Your
blazing	mouths	and	perish.
TEXT	29य थ ा
	
प ् र द ी ᇴ त ं
	
ᇬ व ल न ं
	
प त ङ ् ग ा
	
ि व श ि ᇳ त
	
न ा श ा य
	
स म ृ ሬ व े ग ा ः
	
।
	
त थ ै व
	
न ा श ा य
	
ि व श ि ᇳ त
	
ल ो क ा
-	
ᇿ त व ा ि प
	
व ᇧ त ् र ा ि ण
	
स म ृ ሬ व े ग ा ः
	
॥
२ ९
॥
yathā	pradīptaṁ	jvalanaṁ	pataṅgā
viśanti	nāśāya	samṛddha-vegāḥ
tathaiva	nāśāya	viśanti	lokās
tavāpi	vaktrāṇi	samṛddha-vegāḥ
yathā—
as;	
pradīptam—
blazing;	
jvalanam—
fire;	
pataṅgāḥ—
moths;	
viśanti
—	
enters;	
nāśāya—
destruction;	
samṛddha—
full;
	vegāḥ—
speed;	
tathā	eva
—
similarly;	
nāśāya—
for	destruction;	
viśanti—
entering;	
lokāḥ—
all	people.
tava—
unto	You;	
api—
also;	
vaktrāṇi—
in	the	mouths;	
samṛddha-vegāḥ—
with
full	speed.
TRANSLATION
I	see	all	people	rushing	with	full	speed	into	Your	mouths	as	moths	dash
into	a	blazing	fire.
TEXT	30
ल े ि ल ቋ स े
	
ग ् र स म ा न ः
	
स म ᇳ त ा
-	
ᇺ ल ो क ा ᇳ स म ग ् र ा ᇳ व द न ै ᇬ व ᆼ ल द ् ि भ ः
	
।
	
त े ज ो ि भ र ा प ू य ᆼ
	
ज ग ᇰ स म ग ् र ं
	
भ ा स ᇿ त व ो ग ् र ा ः
	
प ् र त प ि ᇳ त
	
ि व ᇾ ण ो
	
॥
३ ०
॥
lelihyase	grasamānaḥ	samantāl
lokān	samagrān	vadanair	jvaladbhiḥ
tejobhir	āpūrya	jagat	samagraṁ
bhāsas	tavogrāḥ	pratapanti	viṣṇo
lelihyase—
licking;	
grasamānaḥ
—devouring;	
samantāt
—from	all
directions;	
lokān—
people;	
samagrān
—completely;	
vadanaiḥ
—by	the	mouth;jvaladbhiḥ	—
with	blazing;	
tejobhiḥ—
by	effulgence;	
āpūrya
—covering;	
jagat
—the	universe;	
samagram
—all;	
bhāsaḥ—
illuminating;	
tava
—Your;	
ugrāḥ
—
terrible;	
pratapanti—
scorching;	
viṣṇo
—O	all-pervading	Lord.
TRANSLATION
O	Viṣṇu,	I	see	You	devouring	all	people	in	Your	flaming	mouths	and
covering	the	universe	with	Your	immeasurable	rays.	Scorching	the
worlds,	You	are	manifest.
TEXT	31
आ ᇨ य ा ि ह
	
म े
	
क ो
	
भ व ा न ु ग ् र ኅ प ो
	
न म ो ऽ ᇿ त ु
	
त े
	
द े व व र
	
प ् र स ी द
	
।
	
ि व ᇥ ा त ु ि म ᇫ छ ा ि म
	
भ व ᇳ त म ा ሱ ं
	
न
	
ि ह
	
प ् र ज ा न ा ि म
	
त व
	
प ् र व ृ ि ሧ म ्
	
॥
३ १
॥
ākhyāhi	me	ko	bhavān	ugra-rūpo
namo	'stu	te	deva-vara	prasīda
vijñātum	icchāmi	bhavantam	ādyaṁ
na	hi	prajānāmi	tava	pravṛttim
ākhyāhi
—please	explain;	
me
—unto	me;	
kaḥ
—who;	
bhavān
—You;	
ugra-
rūpaḥ
—fierce	form;	
namaḥ	astu
—obeisances;	
te
—unto	You;	
deva-vara
—the
great	one	amongst	the	demigods;	
prasīda
—be	gracious;	
vijñātum
—just	to
know;	
icchāmi
—I	wish;	
bhavantam
—You;	
ādyam
—the	original;	
na
—never;
hi
—certainly;	
prajānāmi
—do	I	know;	
tava
—Your;	
pravṛttim
—mission.
TRANSLATION
O	Lord	of	lords,	so	fierce	of	form,	please	tell	me	who	You	are.	I	offer
my	obeisances	unto	You;	please	be	gracious	to	me.	I	do	not	know	what
Your	mission	is,	and	I	desire	to	hear	of	it.
TEXT	32श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
	
क ा ल ो ऽ ि ᇿ म
	
ल ो क ᇤ य क ृ ᇰ प ् र व ृ ሬ ो
	
ल ो क ा ᇳ स म ा ह त ु ᆼ ि म ह
	
प ् र व ृ ሧ ः
	
।
	
ऋ त े ऽ ि प
	
ᇰ व ा ं
	
न
	
भ ि व ᇾ य ि ᇳ त
	
स व ᆹ
	
य े ऽ व ि ᇿ थ त ा ः
	
प ् र ᇰ य न ी क े ष ु
	
य ो ध ा ः
	
॥
३ २
॥
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
kālo	'smi	loka-kṣaya-kṛt	pravṛddho
lokān	samāhartum	iha	pravṛttaḥ
ṛte	'pi	tvāṁ	na	bhaviṣyanti	sarve
ye	'vasthitāḥ	pratyanīkeṣu	yodhāḥ
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
kālaḥ—
time;	
asmi
—
I	am;	
loka—
the	worlds;	
kṣaya-kṛt—
destroyer;	
pravṛddhaḥ
—to	engage;	
lokān
—
all	people;	
samāhartum—
to	destroy;	
iha—
in	this	world;	
pravṛttaḥ
—to
engage;	
ṛte
	
api—
without	even;	
tvām
—you;	
na—
never;	
bhaviṣyanti—
will	be;
sarve
—all;	
ye
—who;	
avasthitāḥ—
situated;	
pratyanīkeṣu—
on	the	opposite
side;	
yodhāḥ
—the	soldiers.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	Time	I	am,	destroyer	of	the	worlds,	and	I	have
come	to	engage	all	people.	With	the	exception	of	you	[the	Pāṇḍavas],	all
the	soldiers	here	on	both	sides	will	be	slain.
PURPORT
Although	Arjuna	knew	that	Kṛṣṇa	was	his	friend	and	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	he	was	nonetheless	puzzled	by	the	various	forms
exhibited	by	Kṛṣṇa.	Therefore	he	asked	further	about	the	actual	mission	of	this
devastating	force.	It	is	written	in	the	
Vedas	
that	the	Supreme	Truth	destroys
everything,	even	Brahmā.	
Yasya	brahme	ca	kṣatram	ca	ubhe	bhavata
odanaḥ/mṛtyur	yasyopasecanaṁ	ka	itthā	veda	yatra	saḥ.	
Eventually	all	the
brāhmaṇas,	kṣatriyas	
and	everyone	else	are	devoured	by	the	Supreme.	This
form	of	the	Supreme	Lord	is	an	all-devouring	giant,	and	here	Kṛṣṇa	presents
Himself	in	that	form	of	all-devouring	time.	Except	for	a	few	Pāṇḍavas,everyone	who	was	present	in	that	battlefield	would	be	devoured	by	Him.
Arjuna	was	not	in	favor	of	the	fight,	and	he	thought	it	was	better	not	to
fight;	then	there	would	be	no	frustration.	In	reply,	the	Lord	is	saying	that	even
if	he	did	not	fight,	every	one	of	them	would	be	destroyed,	for	that	is	His	plan.
If	he	stopped	fighting,	they	would	die	in	another	way.	Death	cannot	be
checked,	even	if	he	did	not	fight.	In	fact,	they	were	already	dead.	Time	is
destruction,	and	all	manifestations	are	to	be	vanquished	by	the	desire	of	the
Supreme	Lord.	That	is	the	law	of	nature.
TEXT	33
त ᇿ म ा ᇰ ᇰ व म ु ि ሧ ᇾ ठ
	
य श ो
	
ल भ ᇿ व
	
ि ज ᇰ व ा
	
श त ्ኅ न ्
	
भ ु ङ ् ቎ व
	
र ा ᇬ य ं
	
स म ृ ሬ म ्
	
।
	
म य ै व ै त े
	
ि न ह त ा ः
	
प ू व ᆼ म े व
	
ि न ि म ሧ म ा त ् र ं
	
भ व
	
स ᇼ य स ा ि च न ्
	
॥
३ ३
॥
tasmāt	tvam	uttiṣṭha	yaśo	labhasva
jitvā	śatrūn	bhuṅkṣva	rājyaṁ	samṛddham
mayaivaite	nihatāḥ	pūrvam	eva
nimitta-mātraṁ	bhava	savyasācin
tasmāt—
therefore;	
tvām—
you;
	uttiṣṭha—
get	up;	
yaśaḥ—
fame;	
labhasva
—
gain;	
jitvā—
conquering;	
śatrūn—
enemies;	
bhuṅkṣva—
enjoy;	
rājyam
—
kingdom;	
samṛddham—
flourishing;	
mayā—
by	Me;	
eva—
certainly;	
ete—
all
these;	
nihatāḥ—
already	killed;	
pūrvam	eva
—by	previous	elements;	
nimitta-
mātram	—
just	become	the	cause;	
bhava—
become;	
savyasācin
—O
Savyasācin.
TRANSLATION
Therefore	get	up	and	prepare	to	fight.	After	conquering	your	enemies
you	will	enjoy	a	flourishing	kingdom.	They	are	already	put	to	death	by
My	arrangement,	and	you,	O	Savyasācin,	can	be	but	an	instrument	in	the
fight.PURPORT
Savyasācin	
refers	to	one	who	can	shoot	arrows	very	expertly	in	the	field;
thus	Arjuna	is	addressed	as	an	expert	warrior	capable	of	delivering	arrows	to
kill	his	enemies.	"Just	become	an	instrument":	
nimitta-mātram.	
This	word	is
also	very	significant.	The	whole	world	is	moving	according	to	the	plan	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Foolish	persons	who	do	not	have	sufficient
knowledge	think	that	nature	is	moving	without	a	plan	and	all	manifestations
are	but	accidental	formations.	There	are	many	so-called	scientists	who	suggest
that	perhaps	it	was	like	this,	or	maybe	like	that,	but	there	is	no	question	of
"perhaps"	and	"maybe."	There	is	a	specific	plan	being	carried	out	in	this
material	world.	What	is	this	plan?	This	cosmic	manifestation	is	a	chance	for
the	conditioned	souls	to	go	back	to	Godhead,	back	to	home.	As	long	they	have
the	domineering	mentality	which	makes	them	try	to	lord	it	over	material
nature,	they	are	conditioned.	But	anyone	who	can	understand	the	plan	of	the
Supreme	Lord	and	cultivate	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	most	intelligent.	The
creation	and	destruction	of	the	cosmic	manifestation	are	under	the	superior
guidance	of	God.	Thus	the	Battle	of	Kurukṣetra	was	fought	according	to	the
plan	of	God.	Arjuna	was	refusing	to	fight,	but	he	was	told	that	he	should	fight
and	at	the	same	time	desire	the	Supreme	Lord.	Then	he	would	be	happy.	If	one
is	in	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	if	his	life	is	devoted	to	His	transcendental
service,	he	is	perfect.
TEXT	34
द ् र ो ण ं
	
च
	
भ ी ᇾ म ं
	
च
	
ज य द ् र थ ं
	
च
	
क ण ᆾ
	
त थ ा ᇳ य ा न ि प
	
य ो ध व ी र ा न ्
	
।
	
म य ा
	
ह त ा ं ᇿ ᇰ व ं
	
ज ि ह
	
म ा ᇼ य ि थ ᇾ ठ ा
	
य ु ᇲ य ᇿ व
	
ज े त ा ि स
	
र ण े
	
स प ᇰ न ा न ्
	
॥
३ ४
॥
droṇaṁ	ca	bhīṣmaṁ	ca	jayadrathaṁ	ca
karṇaṁ	tathānyān	api	yodha-vīrān
mayā	hatāṁs	tvaṁ	jahi	mā	vyathiṣṭhā
yudhyasva	jetāsi	raṇe	sapatnāndroṇam	ca—
also	Droṇa;	
bhīṣmam	ca—
also	Bhīṣma;	
jayadratham	ca—	
also
Jayadratha;	
karṇam—
also	Karṇa;	
tathā—
also;	
anyān—
others;	
api—	
certainly;
yodha-vīrān—
great	warriors;	
mayā—
by	Me;	
hatān—
already	killed;	
tvam
—
you;	
jahi
—become	victorious;	
mā
—never;	
vyathiṣṭhāḥ
—be	disturbed;
yudhyasva
—just	fight;	
jetāsi
—just	conquer;	
raṇe
—in	the	fight;	
sapatnān
—
enemies.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	All	the	great	warriors—Droṇa,	Bhīṣma,
Jayadratha,	Karṇa—are	already	destroyed.	Simply	fight,	and	you	will
vanquish	your	enemies.
PURPORT
Every	plan	is	made	by	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	but	He	is	so
kind	and	merciful	to	His	devotees	that	He	wants	to	give	the	credit	to	His
devotees	who	carry	out	His	plan	according	to	His	desire.	Life	should	therefore
move	in	such	a	way	that	everyone	acts	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and
understands	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	through	the	medium	of	a
spiritual	master.	The	plans	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	are
understood	by	His	mercy,	and	the	plans	of	the	devotees	are	as	good	as	His
plans.	One	should	follow	such	plans	and	be	victorious	in	the	struggle	for
existence.
TEXT	35
स ᇮ ज य
	
उ व ा च
	
।
ए त ᇫ छ ् ኄ ᇰ व ा
	
व च न ं
	
क े श व ᇿ य
	
क ृ त ा ᇮ ज ि ल व ᆹ प म ा न ः
	
ि क र ी त ी
	
।
	
न म ᇿ क ृ ᇰ व ा
	
भ ू य
	
ए व ा ह
	
क ृ ᇾ ण ं
	
स ग द ् ग द ं
	
भ ी त भ ी त ः
	
प ् र ण ᇸ य
	
॥
३ ५
॥
sañjaya	uvāca
etac	chrutvā	vacanaṁ	keśavasyakṛtāñjalir	vepamānaḥ	kirītī
namaskṛtvā	bhūya	evāha	kṛṣṇaṁ
sagadgadaṁ	bhīta-bhītaḥ	praṇamya
sañjayaḥ	uvāca
—Sañjaya	said;	
etat
—thus;	
śrutvā
—hearing;	
vacanam
—
speech;	
keśavasya
—of	Kṛṣṇa;	
kṛtāñjaliḥ—
with	folded	hands;	
vepamānaḥ
—
trembling;	
kirītī
—Arjuna;	
namaskṛtvā—
offering	obeisances;	
bhūyaḥ—
again;
eva
—also;	
āha
	
kṛṣṇam—
said	unto	Kṛṣṇa;	
sa-gadgadam—
faltering;	
bhīta-
bhītaḥ—
fearful;	
praṇamya
—offering	obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Sañjaya	said	to	Dhṛtarāṣṭra:	O	King,	after	hearing	these	words	from
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Arjuna	trembled,	fearfully	offered
obeisances	with	folded	hands	and	began,	falteringly,	to	speak	as	follows:
PURPORT
As	we	have	already	explained,	because	of	the	situation	created	by	the
universal	form	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Arjuna	became
bewildered	in	wonder;	thus	he	began	to	offer	his	respectful	obeisances	to
Kṛṣṇa	again	and	again,	and	with	faltering	voice	he	began	to	pray,	not	as	a
friend,	but	as	a	devotee	in	wonder.
TEXT	36
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
ᇿ थ ा न े
	
ᇦ ष ी क े श
	
त व
	
प ् र क ी ᇰ य ा ᆼ
	
ज ग ᇰ प ् र ᇦ ᇾ य ᇰ य न ु र ᇬ य त े
	
च
	
।
	
र ᇤ ा ं ि स
	
भ ी त ा ि न
	
ि द श ो
	
द ् र व ि ᇳ त
	
स व ᆹ
	
न म ᇿ य ि ᇳ त
	
च
	
ि स ሬ स ङ ् घ ा ः
	
॥
३ ६
॥
arjuna	uvāca
sthāne	hṛṣīkeśa	tava	prakīrtyā
jagat	prahṛṣyaty	anurajyate	carakṣāṁsi	bhītāni	diśo	dravanti
sarve	namasyanti	ca	siddha-saṅghāḥ
arjunaḥ	uvāca—
Arjuna	said;	
sthāne—
rightly;	
hṛṣīkeśa
—O	master	of	all
senses;	
tava
—Your;	
prakīrtya—
glories;	
jagat
—the	entire	world;	
prahṛṣyati
—
rejoicing;	
anurajyate
—becoming	attached;	
rakṣāṁsi—
the	demons;	
bhītāni
—
out	of	fear;	
diśaḥ—
directions;	
dravanti
—fleeing;	
sarve—
all;	
namasyanti
—
offering	respect;	
ca
—also;	
siddha-saṅghāḥ—
the	perfect	human	beings.
TRANSLATION
O	Hṛṣīkeśa,	the	world	becomes	joyful	upon	hearing	Your	name	and
thus	everyone	becomes	attached	to	You.	Although	the	perfected	beings
offer	You	their	respectful	homage,	the	demons	are	afraid,	and	they	flee
here	and	there.	All	this	is	rightly	done.
PURPORT
Arjuna,	after	hearing	from	Kṛṣṇa	about	the	outcome	of	the	Battle	of
Kurukṣetra,	became	an	enlightened	devotee	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	He	admitted
that	everything	done	by	Kṛṣṇa	is	quite	fit.	Arjuna	confirmed	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the
maintainer	and	the	object	of	worship	for	the	devotees	and	the	destroyer	of	the
undesirables.	His	actions	are	equally	good	for	all.	Arjuna	understood	herein
that	when	the	Battle	of	Kurukṣetra	was	being	concluded,	in	outer	space	there
were	present	many	demigods,	
siddhas,	
and	the	intelligentia	of	the	higher
planets,	and	they	were	observing	the	fight	because	Kṛṣṇa	was	present	there.
When	Arjuna	saw	the	universal	form	of	the	Lord,	the	demigods	took	pleasure
in	it,	but	others,	who	were	demons	and	atheists,	could	not	stand	it	when	the
Lord	was	praised.	Out	of	their	natural	fear	of	the	devastating	form	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	they	fled.	Kṛṣṇa's	treatment	of	the	devotees
and	the	atheists	is	praised	by	Arjuna.	In	all	cases	a	devotee	glorifies	the	Lord
because	he	knows	that	whatever	He	does	is	good	for	all.
TEXT	37क ᇿ म ा ᇫ च
	
त े
	
न
	
न म े र ᇳ म ह ा ᇰ म न ्
	
ग र ी य स े
	
ब ् र ቊ ण ो ऽ ᇴ य ा ि द क त ् र ᆹ
	
।
अ न ᇳ त
	
द े व े श
	
ज ग ि ᇳ न व ा स
	
ᇰ व म ᇤ र ं
	
स द स ሧ ᇰ प र ं
	
य त ्
	
॥
३ ७
॥
kasmāc	ca	te	na	nameran	mahātman
garīyase	brahmaṇo	'py	ādi-kartre
ananta	deveśa	jagan-nivāsa
tvam	akṣaraṁ	sad-asat	tat	paraṁ	yat
kasmāt
—why;	
ca
—also;	
te
—unto	You;	
na
—not;	
nameran
—offer	proper
obeisances;	
mahātman
—O	great	one;	
garīyase
—You	are	better	than;
brahmaṇaḥ—
Brahmā;	
api—
although;	
ādi-kartre—
the	supreme	creator;	
ananta
—unlimited;	
deveśa
-God	of	the	gods;	
jagat-nivāsa—
O	refuge	of	the	universe;
tvam
—You	are;	
akṣaram
—imperishable;	
sat-asat
—cause	and	effect;	
tat-
param—
transcendental;	
yat
—because.
TRANSLATION
O	great	one,	who	stands	above	even	Brahmā,	You	are	the	original
master.	Why	should	they	not	offer	their	homage	up	to	You,	O	limitless
one?	O	refuge	of	the	universe,	You	are	the	invincible	source,	the	cause	of
all	causes,	transcendental	to	this	material	manifestation.
PURPORT
By	this	offering	of	obeisances,	Arjuna	indicates	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	worshipable
by	everyone.	He	is	all-pervading,	and	He	is	the	Soul	of	every	soul.	Arjuna	is
addressing	Kṛṣṇa	as	
mahātmā,	
which	means	that	He	is	most	magnanimous
and	unlimited.	
Ananta	
indicates	that	there	is	nothing	which	is	not	covered	by
the	influence	and	energy	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	and	
deveśa	
means	that	He	is
the	controller	of	all	demigods	and	is	above	them	all.	He	is	the	center	of	the
whole	universe.	Arjuna	also	thought	that	it	was	fitting	that	all	the	perfect
living	entities	and	all	powerful	demigods	offer	their	respectful	obeisances	unto
Him	because	no	one	is	greater	than	Him.	He	especially	mentions	that	Kṛṣṇa	is
greater	than	Brahmā	because	Brahmā	is	created	by	Him.	Brahmā	is	born	outof	the	lotus	stem	grown	from	the	navel	abdomen	of	Garbhodakaśāyī	Viṣṇu,
who	is	Kṛṣṇa's	plenary	expansion;	therefore	Brahmā	and	Lord	Śiva,	who	is
born	of	Brahmā,	and	all	other	demigods	must	offer	their	respectful	obeisances.
Thus	the	Lord	is	respected	by	Lord	Śiva	and	Brahmā	and	similar	other
demigods.	The	word	
akṣaram	
is	very	significant	because	this	material	creation
is	subject	to	destruction,	but	the	Lord	is	above	this	material	creation.	He	is	the
cause	of	all	causes,	and	being	so,	He	is	superior	to	all	the	conditioned	souls
within	this	material	nature	as	well	as	the	material	cosmic	manifestation	itself.
He	is	therefore	the	all-great	Supreme.
TEXT	38
ᇰ व म ा ि द द े व ः
	
प ु ኄ ष ः
	
प ु र ा ण
-
ᇿ ᇰ व म ᇿ य
	
ि व ᇽ व ᇿ य
	
प र ं
	
ि न ध ा न म ्
	
।
व े ሧ ा ि स
	
व े ሱ ं
	
च
	
प र ं
	
च
	
ध ा म
	
ᇰ व य ा
	
त त ं
	
ि व ᇽ व म न ᇳ त ኅ प
	
॥
३ ८
॥
tvam	ādi-devaḥ	puruṣaḥ	purāṇas
tvam	asya	viśvasya	paraṁ	nidhānam
vettāsi	vedyaṁ	ca	paraṁ	ca	dhāma
tvayā	tataṁ	viśvam	ananta-rūpa
tvam
—You;	
ādi-devaḥ—
the	original	Supreme	God;	
puruṣaḥ
—personality;
purāṇaḥ
—old;	
tvam
—You;	
asya
—this;	
viśvasya
—universe;	
param
—
transcenddental;	
nidhānam
—refuge;	
vettā
—knower;	
asi
—You	are;	
vedyam	ca
—
and	the	knowable;	
param	ca—
and	transcendental;	
dhāma—
refuge;	
tvayā
—
by	You;	
tatam
—pervaded;	
viśvam
—universe;	
ananta-rūpa—
unlimited	form.
TRANSLATION
You	are	the	original	Personality,	the	Godhead.	You	are	the	only
sanctuary	of	this	manifested	cosmic	world.	You	know	everything,	and	You
are	all	that	is	knowable.	You	are	above	the	material	modes.	O	limitless
form!	This	whole	cosmic	manifestation	is	pervaded	by	You!PURPORT
Everything	is	resting	on	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead;	therefore	He
is	the	ultimate	rest.	
Nidhānam	
means	that	everything,	even	the	Brahman
effulgence,	rests	on	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	Kṛṣṇa.	He	is	the
knower	of	everything	that	is	happening	in	this	world,	and	if	knowledge	has
any	end,	He	is	the	end	of	all	knowledge;	therefore	He	is	the	known	and	the
knowable.	He	is	the	object	of	knowledge	because	He	is	all-pervading.	Because
He	is	the	cause	in	the	spiritual	world,	He	is	transcendental.	He	is	also	the	chief
personality	in	the	transcendental	world.
TEXT	39
व ा य ु य ᆼ म ो ऽ ि ᇩ न व ᆼ ኄ ण ः
	
श श ा ङ ् क ः
	
प ् र ज ा प ि त ᇿ ᇰ व ं
	
प ् र ि प त ा म ह ᇽ च
	
।
न म ो
	
न म ᇿ त े ऽ ᇿ त ु
	
स ह स ् र क ृ ᇰ व ः
	
प ु न ᇽ च
	
भ ू य ो ऽ ि प
	
न म ो
	
न म ᇿ त े
	
॥
३ ९
॥
vāyur	yamo	'gnir	varuṇaḥ	śaśāṅkaḥ
prajāpatis	tvaṁ	prapitāmahaś	ca
namo	namas	te	'stu	sahasra-kṛtvaḥ
punaś	ca	bhūyo	'pi	namo	namas	te
vāyuḥ—
air;	
yamaḥ
—controller;	
agniḥ
—fire;	
varuṇaḥ
—water;	
śaśāṅkaḥ
—
moon;	
prajāpatiḥ
—Brahmā;	
tvam
—You;	
prapitāmahaḥ
—grandfather;	
ca
—
also;	
namaḥ
—offering	respects;	
namaḥ	te
—again	I	offer	my	respects	unto
You;	
astu
—are	being;	
sahasra-kṛtvaḥ
—a	thousand	times;	
punaḥ	ca
—and
again;	
bhūyaḥ—
again;	
api
—also;	
namaḥ
—offer	my	respects;	
namaḥ	te
—
offering	my	respects	unto	You.
TRANSLATION
You	are	air,	fire,	water,	and	You	are	the	moon!	You	are	the	supreme
controller	and	the	grandfather.	Thus	I	offer	my	respectful	obeisances	untoYou	a	thousand	times,	and	again	and	yet	again!
PURPORT
The	Lord	is	addressed	here	as	air	because	the	air	is	the	most	important
representation	of	all	the	demigods,	being	all-pervasive.	Arjuna	also	addresses
Kṛṣṇa	as	the	grandfather	because	He	is	the	father	of	Brahmā,	the	first	living
creature	in	the	universe.
TEXT	40
न म ः
	
प ु र ᇿ त ा द थ
	
प ृ ᇾ ठ त ᇿ त े
	
न म ो ऽ ᇿ त ु
	
त े
	
स व ᆼ त
	
ए व
	
स व ᆼ
	
।
अ न ᇳ त व ी य ा ᆼ ि म त ि व क ् र म ᇿ ᇰ व ं
	
स व ᆾ
	
स म ा ᇴ न ो ि ष
	
त त ो ऽ ि स
	
स व ᆼ ः
	
॥
४ ०
॥
namaḥ	purastād	atha	pṛṣṭhatas	te
namo	'stu	te	sarvata	eva	sarva
ananta-vīryāmita-vikramas	tvaṁ
sarvaṁ	samāpnoṣi	tato	'si	sarvaḥ
namaḥ—
offering	obeisances;	
purastāt—
from	the	front;	
atha—
also;
pṛṣṭhataḥ
—from	behind;	
te—
You;
	namaḥ	astu
—offer	my	respects;	
te
—unto
You;	
sarvataḥ—
from	all	sides;	
eva	sarva—
because	You	are	everything;
ananta-vīrya—
unlimited	potency;	
amita-vikramaḥ—
unlimited	force;	
tvam
—
You;
	sarvam—
everything;	
samāpnoṣi—
cover;	
tataḥ	asi—
therefore	You	are;
sarvaḥ—
everything.
TRANSLATION
Obeisances	from	the	front,	from	behind	and	from	all	sides!	O
unbounded	power,	You	are	the	master	of	limitless	might!	You	are	all-
pervading,	and	thus	You	are	everything!
PURPORTOut	of	loving	ecstasy	for	Kṛṣṇa,	his	friend,	Arjuna	is	offering	his	respects
from	all	sides.	He	is	accepting	that	He	is	the	master	of	all	potencies	and	all
prowess	and	far	superior	to	all	the	great	warriors	assembled	on	the	battlefield.
It	is	said	in	the	
Viṣṇu
	
Purāṇa:	yo	'yaṁ	tavāgato	deva-samīpaṁ	devatā-gaṇaḥ
sa	tvam	eva	jagat-sraṣṭā	yataḥ	sarva-gato	bhavān.	
"Whoever	comes	before
You,	be	he	a	demigod,	is	created	by	You,	O	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead."
TEXTS	41-42
स ख े ि त
	
म ᇰ व ा
	
प ् र स भ ं
	
य द ु ᇧ त ं
	
ह े
	
क ृ ᇾ ण
	
ह े
	
य ा द व
	
ह े
	
स ख े ि त
	
।
अ ज ा न त ा
	
म ि ह म ा न ं
	
त व े द ं
	
म य ा
	
प ् र म ा द ा ᇰ प ् र ण य े न
	
व ा ऽ ि प
	
॥
४ १
॥
य ᇫ च ा व ह ा स ा थ ᆼ म स ᇰ क ृ त ो ऽ ि स
	
ि व ह ा र श ᇹ य ा स न भ ो ज न े ष ु
	
।
ए क ो ऽ थ व ा ᇴ य ᇫ य ु त
	
त ᇰ स म ᇤ ं
	
त ᇰ ᇤ ा म य े
	
ᇰ व ा म ह म प ् र म े य म ्
	
॥
४ २
॥
sakheti	matvā	prasabhaṁ	yad	uktaṁ
he	kṛṣṇa	he	yādava	he	sakheti
ajānatā	mahimānaṁ	tavedaṁ
mayā	pramādāt	praṇayena	vāpi
yac	cāvahāsārtham	asatkṛto	'si
vihāra-śayyāsana-bhojaneṣu
eko	'tha	vāpy	acyuta	tat-samakṣaṁ
tat	kṣāmaye	tvām	aham	aprameyam
sakhā—
friend;	
iti—
thus;	
matvā—
thinking;	
prasabham—
temporary;	
yat—
whatever;	
uktam—
said;	
he
	
krṣṇa
—O	Kṛṣṇa;	
he
	
yādava
—O	Yādava;	
he
	
sakhā
iti
—O	my	dear	friend,	
ajānatā—
without	knowing;	
mahimānam—
glories;	
tava
—
Your;	
idam—
this;	
mayā—
by	me;	
pramādāt
—out	of	foolishness;	
pranayena
—
out	of	love;	
vā
	
api—
either;	
yat
—whatever;	
ca—
also;	
avahāsārtham—
for
joking;	
asatkṛtaḥ
—dishonor;	
asi—
have	been	done;	
vihāra	—
in	relaxation;
śayyā
—in	joking;	
āsana
—in	a	resting	place;	
bhojaneṣu—
or	while	eating
together;	
ekaḥ
—alone;	
athavā
—or;	
api—
others;	
acyuta
—O	infallible	one;	
tat-samakṣam—
as	Your	competitor;	
tat
—all	those;	
kṣāmaye
—	excuse;	
tvām
—
You;	
aham
—I;	
aprameyam
—immeasurable.
TRANSLATION
I	have	in	the	past	addressed	You	as	"O	Kṛṣṇa,"	"O	Yādava,"	"O	my
friend,"	without	knowing	Your	glories.	Please	forgive	whatever	I	may
have	done	in	madness	or	in	love.	I	have	dishonored	You	many	times	while
relaxing	or	while	lying	on	the	same	bed	or	eating	together,	sometimes
alone	and	sometimes	in	front	of	many	friends.	Please	excuse	me	for	all	my
offenses.
PURPORT
Although	Kṛṣṇa	is	manifested	before	Arjuna	in	His	universal	form,	Arjuna
remembers	his	friendly	relationship	with	Kṛṣṇa	and	is	therefore	asking	pardon
and	requesting	Him	to	excuse	him	for	the	many	informal	gestures	which	arise
out	of	friendship.	He	is	admitting	that	formerly	he	did	not	know	that	Kṛṣṇa
could	assume	such	a	universal	form,	although	He	explained	it	as	his	intimate
friend.	Arjuna	did	not	know	how	many	times	he	may	have	dishonored	Him	by
addressing	Him	as	"O	my	friend,	O	Kṛṣṇa,	O	Yādava,"	etc.,	without
acknowledging	His	opulence.	But	Kṛṣṇa	is	so	kind	and	merciful	that	in	spite
of	such	opulence	He	played	with	Arjuna	as	a	friend.	Such	is	the	transcendental
loving	reciprocation	between	the	devotee	and	the	Lord.	The	relationship
between	the	living	entity	and	Kṛṣṇa	is	fixed	eternally;	it	cannot	be	forgotten,
as	we	can	see	from	the	behavior	of	Arjuna.	Although	Arjuna	has	seen	the
opulence	in	the	universal	form,	he	could	not	forget	his	friendly	relationship
with	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	43
ि प त ा ि स
	
ल ो क ᇿ य
	
च र ा च र ᇿ य
	
ᇰ व म ᇿ य
	
प ू ᇬ य ᇽ च
	
ग ु ኄ ग ᆼ र ी य ा न ्
	
।
न
	
ᇰ व ᇰ स म ो ऽ ᇿ ᇰ य ᇷ य ि ध क ः
	
क ु त ो ऽ ᇳ य ो
	
ल ो क त ् र य े ऽ ᇴ य प ् र ि त म प ् र भ ा व
	
॥
४ ३
॥pitāsi	lokasya	carācarasya
tvam	asya	pūjyaś	ca	gurur	garīyān
na	tvat-samo	'sty	abhyadhikaḥ	kuto	'nyo
loka-traye	'py	apratima-prabhāva
pitā—
father;	
asi—
You	are;	
lokasya—
of	all	the	world;	
cara—
moving;
acarasya—
nonmoving;	
tvam—
You	are;	
asya—
of	this;	
pūjyaḥ—
worshipable;
ca—
also;	
guruḥ
—master;	
garīyān—
glorious;	
na—
never;	
tvat-samaḥ—
equal	to
You;
	asti—
there	is;	
abhyadhikaḥ—
greater;	
kutaḥ—
how	is	it	possible;	
anyaḥ
—
other;	
loka-traye—
in	three	planetary	systems;	
api—
also;	
apratima
—
immeasurable;	
prabhāva—
power.
TRANSLATION
You	are	the	father	of	this	complete	cosmic	manifestation,	the
worshipable	chief,	the	spiritual	master.	No	one	is	equal	to	You,	nor	can
anyone	be	one	with	You.	Within	the	three	worlds,	You	are	immeasurable.
PURPORT
The	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	is	worshipable	as	a	father	is	worshipable	for	his	son.	He	is
the	spiritual	master	because	He	originally	gave	the	Vedic	instructions	to
Brahmā,	and	presently	He	is	also	instructing	
Bhagavad-gītā	
to	Arjuna;
therefore	He	is	the	original	spiritual	master,	and	any	bona	fide	spiritual	master
at	the	present	moment	must	be	a	descendant	in	the	line	of	disciplic	succession
stemming	from	Kṛṣṇa.	Without	being	a	representative	of	Kṛṣṇa,	one	cannot
become	a	teacher	or	spiritual	master	of	transcendental	subject	matter.
The	Lord	is	being	paid	obeisances	in	all	respects.	He	is	of	immeasurable
greatness.	No	one	can	be	greater	than	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
Kṛṣṇa,	because	no	one	is	equal	to	or	higher	than	Kṛṣṇa	within	any
manifestation,	spiritual	or	material.	Everyone	is	below	Him.	No	one	can	excel
Him.
The	Supreme	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	has	senses	and	a	body	like	the	ordinary	man,	but
for	Him	there	is	no	difference	between	His	senses,	body,	mind	and	Himself.
Foolish	persons	who	do	not	know	Him	perfectly	say	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	different
from	His	soul,	mind,	heart	and	everything	else.	Kṛṣṇa	is	absolute;	thereforeHis	activities	and	potencies	are	supreme.	It	is	also	stated	that	He	does	not	have
senses	like	ours.	He	can	perform	all	sensual	activities;	therefore	His	senses	are
neither	imperfect	nor	limited.	No	one	can	be	greater	than	Him,	no	one	can	be
equal	to	Him,	and	everyone	is	lower	than	Him.
Whoever	knows	His	transcendental	body,	activities	and	perfection,	after
quitting	his	body,	returns	to	Him	and	doesn't	come	back	again	to	this
miserable	world.	Therefore	one	should	know	that	Kṛṣṇa's	activities	are
different	from	others.	The	best	policy	is	to	follow	the	principles	of	Kṛṣṇa;	that
will	make	one	perfect.	It	is	also	stated	that	there	is	no	one	who	is	master	of
Kṛṣṇa;	everyone	is	His	servant.	Only	Kṛṣṇa	is	God,	and	everyone	is	servant.
Everyone	is	complying	with	His	order.	There	is	no	one	who	can	deny	His
order.	Everyone	is	acting	according	to	His	direction,	being	under	His
superintendence.	As	stated	in	the	
Brahmā-saṁhitā,	
He	is	the	cause	of	all
causes.
TEXT	44
त ᇿ म ा ᇰ प ् र ण ᇸ य
	
प ् र ि ण ध ा य
	
क ा य ं
	
प ् र स ा द य े
	
ᇰ व ा म ह म ी श म ी ड ᆸ म ्
	
।
ि प त े व
	
प ु त ् र ᇿ य
	
स ख े व
	
स ᇨ य ु ः
	
ि प ् र य ः
	
ि प ् र य ा य ा ह ᆼ ि स
	
द े व
	
स ो ढ ु म ्
	
॥
४ ४
॥
tasmāt	praṇamya	praṇidhāya	kāyaṁ
prasādaye	tvām	aham	īśam	īḍyam
piteva	putrasya	sakheva	sakhyuḥ
priyaḥ	priyāyārhasi	deva	soḍhum
tasmāt—
therefore;
	praṇamya
—after	offering	obeisances;
	praṇidhāya
—
laying	down;
	kāyam—
body;
	prasādaye—
to	beg	mercy;
	tvām—
unto	you;
	aham
—I;	
īśam
—unto	the	Supreme	Lord;	
īḍyam
—who	is	worshipable;	
pitā	iva
—
like	a	father;	
putrasya
—of	a	son;	
sakhā	iva
—like	a	friend;	
sakhyuḥ—
of	a
friend;	
priyaḥ—
lover;	
priyāyāḥ—
of	the	dearmost;	
arhasi
—You	should;	
deva
—my	Lord;	
soḍhum
—tolerate.
TRANSLATIONYou	are	the	Supreme	Lord,	to	be	worshiped	by	every	living	being.	Thus
I	fall	down	to	offer	You	my	respects	and	ask	Your	mercy.	Please	tolerate
the	wrongs	that	I	may	have	done	to	You	and	bear	with	me	as	a	father	with
his	son,	or	a	friend	with	his	friend,	or	a	lover	with	his	beloved.
PURPORT
Kṛṣṇa's	devotees	relate	to	Kṛṣṇa	in	various	relationships;	one	might	treat
Kṛṣṇa	as	a	son,	one	might	treat	Kṛṣṇa	as	a	husband,	as	a	friend,	as	a	master,
etc.	Kṛṣṇa	and	Arjuna	are	related	in	friendship.	As	the	father	tolerates,	or	the
husband	or	master	tolerates,	so	Kṛṣṇa	tolerates.
TEXT	45
अ द ृ ᇾ ट प ू व ᆾ
	
ᇦ ि ष त ो ऽ ि ᇿ म
	
द ृ ᇾ ट ् व ा
	
भ य े न
	
च
	
प ् र ᇼ य ि थ त ं
	
म न ो
	
म े
	
।
त द े व
	
म े
	
द श ᆼ य
	
द े व
	
ኅ प ं
	
प ् र स ी द
	
द े व े श
	
ज ग ि ᇳ न व ा स
	
॥
४ ५
॥
adṛṣṭa-pūrvaṁ	hṛṣito	'smi	dṛṣṭvā
bhayena	ca	pravyathitaṁ	mano	me
tad	eva	me	darśaya	deva	rūpaṁ
prasīda	deveśa	jagan-nivāsa
adṛṣṭa-pūrvam—
never	seen	before;	
hṛṣitaḥ—
gladdened;	
asmi—
I	am;	
dṛṣṭvā
—
by	seeing;	
bhayena—
out	of	fear;	
ca—
also;
	pravyathitam—
perturbed;	
manaḥ
—
mind;	
me—
mine;	
tat—
therefore;	
eva—
certainly;	
me—
unto	me;	
darśaya—
show;	
deva
—O	Lord;	
rūpam—
the	form;	
prasīda—
just	be	gracious;	
deveśa—
O	Lord	of	lords;	
jagat-nivāsa—
the	refuge	of	the	universe.
TRANSLATION
After	seeing	this	universal	form,	which	I	have	never	seen	before,	I	am
gladdened,	but	at	the	same	time	my	mind	is	disturbed	with	fear.
Therefore	please	bestow	Your	grace	upon	me	and	reveal	again	Your	formas	the	Personality	of	Godhead,	O	Lord	of	lords,	O	abode	of	the	universe.
PURPORT
Arjuna	is	always	in	confidence	with	Kṛṣṇa	because	he	is	a	very	dear	friend,
and	as	a	dear	friend	is	gladdened	by	his	friend's	opulence,	Arjuna	is	very
joyful	to	see	that	his	friend,	Kṛṣṇa,	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	and
can	show	such	a	wonderful	universal	form.	But	at	the	same	time,	after	seeing
that	universal	form,	he	is	afraid	that	he	has	committed	so	many	offenses	to
Kṛṣṇa	out	of	his	unalloyed	friendship.	Thus	his	mind	is	disturbed	out	of	fear,
although	he	had	no	reason	to	fear.	Arjuna	therefore	is	asking	Kṛṣṇa	to	show
His	Nārāyaṇa	form	because	He	can	assume	any	form.	This	universal	form	is
material	and	temporary,	as	the	material	world	is	temporary.	But	in	the
Vaikuṇṭha	planets	He	has	His	transcendental	form	with	four	hands	as
Nārāyaṇa.	There	are	innumerable	planets	in	the	spiritual	sky,	and	in	each	of
them	Kṛṣṇa	is	present	by	His	plenary	manifesttations	of	different	names.	Thus
Arjuna	desired	to	see	one	of	the	forms	manifest	in	the	Vaikuṇṭha	planets.	Of
course	in	each	Vaikuṇṭha	planet	the	form	of	Nārāyaṇa	is	four-handed,	and	the
four	hands	hold	different	symbols,	the	conchshell,	mace,	lotus	and	disc.
According	to	the	different	hands	these	four	things	are	held	in,	the	Nārāyaṇas
are	named.	All	of	these	forms	are	one	and	the	same	to	Kṛṣṇa;	therefore	Arjuna
requests	to	see	His	four-	handed	feature.
TEXT	46
ि क र ी ि ट न ं
	
ग ि द न ं
	
च क ् र ह ᇿ त ं
-	
इ ᇫ छ ा ि म
	
ᇰ व ा ं
	
द ् र ᇾ ट ु म ह ं
	
त थ ै व
	
।
त े न ै व
	
ኅ प े ण
	
च त ु भ ु ᆼ ज े न
	
स ह स ् र ब ा ह ो
	
भ व
	
ि व ᇽ व म ू त ᆹ
	
॥
४ ६
॥
kirīṭinaṁ	gadinaṁ	cakra-hastam
icchāmi	tvāṁ	draṣṭum	ahaṁ	tathaiva
tenaiva	rūpeṇa	catur-bhujena
sahasra-bāho	bhava	viśva-mūrte
kirīṭinam—
with	helmet;	
gadinam—
with	club;	
cakra-hastam—
disc	in	hand;icchāmi—
I	wish;	
tvām—
You;
	draṣṭum—
to	see;	
aham—
I;
	tathā	eva—
in	that
position;	
tena	eva—
by	that;	
rūpeṇa—
with	form;	
catur-bhujena—
four-handed;
sahasra-bāho
—O	thousand-handed	one;	
bhava—
just	become;	
viśva-mūrte
—
O	universal	form.
TRANSLATION
O	universal	Lord,	I	wish	to	see	You	in	Your	four-armed	form,	with
helmeted	head	and	with	club,	wheel,	conch	and	lotus	flower	in	Your
hands.	I	long	to	see	You	in	that	form.
PURPORT
In	the	
Brahmā-saṁhitā
	it	isstated	that	the	Lord	is	eternally	situated	in
hundreds	and	thousands	of	forms,	and	the	main	forms	are	those	like	Rāma,
Nṛsiṁha,	Nārāyaṇa,	etc.	There	are	innumerable	forms.	But	Arjuna	knew	that
Kṛṣṇa	is	the	original	Personality	of	Godhead	assuming	His	temporary
universal	form.	He	is	now	asking	to	see	the	form	of	Nārāyaṇa,	a	spiritual
form.	This	verse	establishes	without	any	doubt	the	statement	of	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam	
that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	original	Personality	of	Godhead	and	all	other
features	originate	from	Him.	He	is	not	different	from	His	plenary	expansions,
and	He	is	God	in	any	of	His	innumerable	forms.	In	all	of	these	forms	He	is
fresh	like	a	young	man.	That	is	the	constant	feature	of	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.	One	who	knows	Kṛṣṇa	at	once	becomes	free	from	all
contamination	of	the	material	world.
TEXT	47
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
म य ा
	
प ् र स ᇳ न े न
	
त व ा ज ु ᆼ न े द ं
	
ኅ प ं
	
प र ं
	
द ि श ᆼ त म ा ᇰ म य ो ग ा त ्
	
।
त े ज ो म य ं
	
ि व ᇽ व म न ᇳ त म ा ሱ ं
	
य ᇳ म े
	
ᇰ व द ᇳ य े न
	
न
	
द ृ ᇾ ट प ू व ᆼ म ्
	
॥
४ ७
॥
śrī	bhagavān	uvācamayā	prasannena	tavārjunedaṁ
rūpaṁ	paraṁ	darśitam	ātma-yogāt
tejomayaṁ	viśvam	anantam	ādyaṁ
yan	me	tvad-anyena	na	dṛṣṭa-pūrvam
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
mayā
—by
Me;	
prasannena
—happily;	
tava
—unto	you;	
arjuna
—O	Arjuna;	
idam
—this;
rūpam
—form;	
param
—transcendental;	
darśitam
—shown;	
ātma-yogāt
—by
My	internal	potency;	
tejomayam—
full	of	effulgence;	
viśvam—
the	entire
universe;	
anantam
—unlimited;	
ādyam
—original;	
yat	me
—that	which	is	Mine;
tvat-anyena
—besides	you;	
na
	
dṛṣṭa-pūrvam—
no	one	has	previously	seen.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	My	dear	Arjuna,	happily	do	I	show	you	this
universal	form	within	the	material	world	by	My	internal	potency.	No	one
before	you	has	ever	seen	this	unlimited	and	glaringly	effulgent	form.
PURPORT
Arjuna	wanted	to	see	the	universal	form	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	so	out	of	His
mercy	upon	His	devotee	Arjuna,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	showed	His	universal	form	full
of	effulgence	and	opulence.	This	form	was	glaring	like	the	sun,	and	its	many
faces	were	rapidly	changing.	Kṛṣṇa	showed	this	form	just	to	satisfy	the	desire
of	His	friend	Arjuna.	This	form	was	manifested	by	Kṛṣṇa	through	His	internal
potency,	which	is	inconceivable	by	human	speculation.	No	one	had	seen	this
universal	form	of	the	Lord	before	Arjuna,	but	because	the	form	was	shown	to
Arjuna,	other	devotees	in	the	heavenly	planets	and	in	other	planets	in	outer
space	could	also	see	it.	They	did	not	see	it	before,	but	because	of	Arjuna	they
were	also	able	to	see	it.	In	other	words,	all	the	disciplic	devotees	of	the	Lord
could	see	the	universal	form	which	was	shown	to	Arjuna	by	the	mercy	of
Kṛṣṇa.	Someone	commented	that	this	form	was	shown	to	Duryodhana	also
when	Kṛṣṇa	went	to	Duryodhana	to	negotiate	for	peace.	Unfortunately,
Duryodhana	did	not	accept	the	peace	offer,	but	at	that	time	Kṛṣṇa	manifested
some	of	His	universal	forms.	But	those	forms	are	different	from	this	one
shown	to	Arjuna.	It	is	clearly	said	that	no	one	has	ever	seen	this	form	before.TEXT	48
न
	
व े द
	
य ᇥ ा ᇲ य य न ै न ᆼ
	
द ा न ै
-
न ᆼ
	
च
	
ि क ् र य ा ि भ न ᆼ
	
त प ो ि भ ኄ ग ् र ै ः
	
।
ए व ं ኅ प ः
	
श ᇧ य
	
अ ह ं
	
न ृ ल ो क े
	
द ् र ᇾ ट ु ं
	
ᇰ व द ᇳ य े न
	
क ु ኄ प ् र व ी र
	
॥
४ ८
॥
na	veda-yajñādhyayanair	na	dānair
na	ca	kriyābhir	na	tapobhir	ugraiḥ
evaṁ	rūpaḥ	śakya	ahaṁ	nṛloke
draṣṭuṁ	tvad-anyena	kuru-pravīra
na—
never;	
veda—
Vedic	study;	
yajña—
sacrifice;	
adhyayanaiḥ—
studying;
na	dānaiḥ—
by	charity;	
na—
never;	
ca—
also;	
kriyābhiḥ—
by	pious	activities;
na	tapobhiḥ—
by	serious	penances;	
ugraiḥ
—severe;	
evam
—thus;	
rūpaḥ
—
form;	
śakyaḥ—
can	be	seen;	
aham
—I;	
nṛloke—
in	this	material	world;	
draṣṭum
—to	see;	
tvat
—you;	
anyena—
by	another;	
kuru-pravīra
—O	best	among	the
Kuru	warriors.
TRANSLATION
O	best	of	the	Kuru	warriors,	no	one	before	you	has	ever	seen	this
universal	form	of	Mine,	for	neither	by	studying	the	Vedas,	nor	by
performing	sacrifices,	nor	by	charities	or	similar	activities	can	this	form
be	seen.	Only	you	have	seen	this.
PURPORT
The	divine	vision	in	this	connection	should	be	clearly	understood.	Who	can
have	divine	vision?	Divine	means	godly.	Unless	one	attains	the	status	of
divinity	as	a	demigod,	he	cannot	have	divine	vision.	And	what	is	a	demigod?
It	is	stated	in	the	Vedic	scriptures	that	those	who	are	devotees	of	Lord	Viṣṇu
are	demigods.	Those	who	are	atheistic,	i.e.,	who	do	not	believe	in	Viṣṇu,	or
who	only	recognize	the	impersonal	part	of	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	Supreme,	cannot	have
the	divine	vision.	It	is	not	possible	to	decry	Kṛṣṇa	and	at	the	same	time	havethe	divine	vision.	One	cannot	have	the	divine	vision	without	becoming	divine.
In	other	words,	those	who	have	divine	vision	can	also	see	like	Arjuna.
The	
Bhagavad-gītā	
gives	the	description	of	the	universal	form,	and	this
description	was	unknown	to	everyone	before	Arjuna.	Now	one	can	have	some
idea	of	the	
viśva-rūpa	
after	this	incidence;	those	who	are	actually	divine	can
see	the	universal	form	of	the	Lord.	But	one	cannot	be	divine	without	being	a
pure	devotee	of	Kṛṣṇa.	The	devotees,	however,	who	are	actually	in	the	divine
nature	and	who	have	divine	vision,	are	not	very	much	interested	to	see	the
universal	form	of	the	Lord.	As	described	in	the	previous	verse,	Arjuna	desired
to	see	the	four-handed	form	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	as	Viṣṇu,	and	he	was	actually
afraid	of	the	universal	form.
In	this	verse	there	are	some	significant	words,	just	like	
veda-yajñādhya-
yanaiḥ,	
which	refers	to	studying	Vedic	literature	and	the	subject	matter	of
sacrificial	regulations.	
Veda	
refers	to	all	kinds	of	Vedic	literature,	namely	the
four	
Vedas	(Ṛk,	Yajus,	Sāma	
and	
Atharva)	
and	the	eighteen	
Purāṇas	
and
Upaniṣads,	
and	
Vedānta-sūtra.	
One	can	study	these	at	home	or	anywhere	else.
Similarly,	there	are	
sūtras,	Kalpa-sūtras	
and	
Mīmāṁsā-sūtras,	
for	studying
the	method	of	sacrifice.	
Dānaiḥ	
refers	to	charity	which	is	offered	to	a	suitable
party.	such	as	those	who	are	engaged	in	the	transcenddental	loving	service	of
the	Lord,	the	
brāhmaṇas	
and	the	
Vaiṣṇavas.	
Similarly,	pious	activities	refer	to
the	
agni-hotra,	
etc.,	the	prescribed	duties	of	the	different	castes.	Pious
activities	and	the	voluntary	acceptance	of	some	bodily	pains	are	called
tapasya.	
So	one	can	perform	all	these,	can	accept	bodily	penances,	give
charity,	study	the	
Vedas,	
etc.,	but	unless	he	is	a	devotee	like	Arjuna,	it	is	not
possible	to	see	that	universal	form.	Those	who	are	impersonalists	are	also
imagining	that	they	are	seeing	the	universal	form	of	the	Lord,	but	from
Bhagavad-gītā	
we	understand	that	the	impersonalists	are	not	devotees.
Therefore	they	are	unable	to	see	the	universal	form	of	the	Lord.
There	are	many	persons	who	create	incarnations.	They	falsely	claim	an
ordinary	human	to	be	an	incarnation,	but	this	is	all	foolishness.	We	should
follow	the	principles	of	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
otherwise	there	is	no	possibility	of
attaining	perfect	spiritual	knowledge.	Although	
Bhagavad-gītā	
isconsidered
the	preliminary	study	of	the	science	of	God,	still	it	is	so	perfect	that	one	can
distinguish	what	is	what.	The	followers	of	a	pseudo	incarnation	may	say	that
they	have	also	seen	the	transcendental	incarnation	of	God,	the	universal	form,
but	that	is	not	acceptable	because	it	is	clearly	stated	here	that	unless	one
becomes	a	devotee	of	Kṛṣṇa,	one	cannot	see	the	universal	form	of	God.	Soone	first	of	all	has	to	become	a	pure	devotee	of	Kṛṣṇa;	then	he	can	claim	that
he	can	show	the	universal	form	of	what	he	has	seen.	A	devotee	of	Kṛṣṇa
cannot	accept	false	incarnations	or	followers	of	false	incarnations.
TEXT	49
म ा
	
त े
	
ᇼ य थ ा
	
म ा
	
च
	
ि व म ू ढ भ ा व ो
	
द ृ ᇾ ट ् व ा
	
ኅ प ं
	
घ ो र म ी द ृ ङ ् म म े द म ्
	
।
ᇼ य प े त भ ी ः
	
प ् र ी त म न ा ः
	
प ु न ᇿ ᇰ व ं
	
त द े व
	
म े
	
ኅ प ि म द ं
	
प ् र प ᇽ य
	
॥
४ ९
॥
mā	te	vyathā	mā	ca	vimūḍha-bhāvo
dṛṣṭvā	rūpaṁ	ghoram	īdṛṅ	mamedam
vyapetabhīḥ	prīta-manāḥ	punas	tvaṁ
tad	eva	me	rūpam	idaṁ	prapaśya
mā
—let	it	not	be;	
te
—unto	you;	
vyathā
—trouble;	
mā
—let	it	not	be;	
ca
—
also;	
vimūḍha-bhāvaḥ
—bewilderment;	
dṛṣṭvā
—by	seeing;	
rūpam
—form;
ghoram
—horrible;	
īdṛk
—like	this;	
mama
—My;	
idam
—as	it	is;	
vyapetabhīḥ
—
just	become	free	from	all	fear;	
prīta-manāḥ
—be	pleased	in	mind;	
punaḥ
—
again;	
tvam
—you;	
tat
—that;	
eva
—thus;	
me
—My;	
rūpam
—form;	
idam
—this;
prapaśya
—just	see.
TRANSLATION
Your	mind	has	been	perturbed	upon	seeing	this	horrible	feature	of
Mine.	Now	let	it	be	finished.	My	devotee,	be	free	from	all	disturbance.
With	a	peaceful	mind	you	can	now	see	the	form	you	desire.
PURPORT
In	the	beginning	of	
Bhagavad-gītā	
Arjuna	was	worried	about	killing
Bhīṣma	and	Droṇa,	his	worshipful	grandfathers	and	masters.	But	Kṛṣṇa	said
that	he	need	not	be	afraid	of	killing	his	grandfather.	When	they	tried	to	disrobe
Draupadī	in	the	assembly,	Bhīṣma	and	Droṇa	were	silent,	and	for	suchnegligence	of	duty	they	should	be	killed.	Kṛṣṇa	showed	His	universal	form	to
Arjuna	just	to	show	him	that	these	people	were	already	killed	for	their
unlawful	action.	That	scene	was	shown	to	Arjuna	because	devotees	are	always
peaceful,	and	they	cannot	perform	such	horrible	actions.	The	purpose	of	the
revelation	of	the	universal	form	was	shown;	now	Arjuna	wanted	to	see	the
four-armed	form,	and	Kṛṣṇa	showed	him.	A	devotee	is	not	much	interested	in
the	universal	form,	for	it	does	not	enable	one	to	reciprocate	loving	feelings.	A
devotee	wants	to	offer	his	respectful	worshiping	feelings;	thus	he	wants	to	see
the	two-handed	or	four-handed	Kṛṣṇa	form	so	he	can	reciprocate	in	loving
service	with	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.
TEXT	50
स ᇮ ज य
	
उ व ा च
	
।
इ ᇰ य ज ु ᆼ न ं
	
व ा स ु द े व ᇿ त थ ो ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
ᇿ व क ं
	
ኅ प ं
	
द श ᆼ य ा म ा स
	
भ ू य ः
	
।
आ ᇽ व ा स य ा म ा स
	
च
	
भ ी त म े न ं
	
भ ू ᇰ व ा
	
प ु न ः
	
स ौ ᇸ य व प ु म ᆼ ह ा ᇰ म ा
	
॥
५ ०
॥
sañjaya	uvāca
ity	arjunaṁ	vāsudevas	tathoktvā
svakaṁ	rūpaṁ	darśayāmāsa	bhūyaḥ
āśvāsayāmāsa	ca	bhītam	enaṁ
bhūtvā	punaḥ	saumya-vapur	mahātmā
sañjayaḥ	uvāca
—Sañjaya	said;	
iti
—thus;	
arjunam
—unto	Arjuna;
vāsudevaḥ
—Kṛṣṇa;	
tathā
—that	way;	
uktvā
—saying;	
svakam
—His	own;
rūpam
—form;	
darśayāmāsa
—showed;	
bhūyaḥ
—again;	
āśvāsayāmāsa
—also
convinced	him;	
ca
—also;	
bhītam
—fearful;	
enam
—him;	
bhūtvā	punaḥ
—
becoming	again;	
saumya-vapuḥ
—beautiful	form;	
mahātmā
—the	great	one.
TRANSLATION
Sañjaya	said	to	Dhṛtarāṣṭra:	The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
Kṛṣṇa,	while	speaking	thus	to	Arjuna,	displayed	His	real	four-armed
form,	and	at	last	He	showed	him	His	two-armed	form,	thus	encouragingthe	fearful	Arjuna.
PURPORT
When	Kṛṣṇa	appeared	as	the	son	of	Vasudeva	and	Devakī,	He	first	of	all
appeared	as	four-armed	Nārāyaṇa,	but	when	He	was	requested	by	His	parents,
He	transformed	Himself	into	an	ordinary	child	in	appearance.	Similarly,	Kṛṣṇa
knew	that	Arjuna	was	not	interested	in	seeing	a	four-	handed	form	of	Kṛṣṇa,
but	since	he	asked	to	see	this	four-handed	form,	He	also	showed	him	this	form
again	and	then	showed	Himself	in	His	two-	handed	form.	The	word	
saumya-
vapuḥ
	is	very	significant.	
Saumya-vapu	
is	a	very	beautiful	form;	it	is	known	as
the	most	beautiful	form.	When	He	was	present,	everyone	was	attracted	simply
by	Kṛṣṇa's	form,	and	because	Kṛṣṇa	is	director	of	the	universe,	He	just
banished	the	fear	of	Arjuna,	His	devotee,	and	showed	him	again	His	beautiful
form	of	Kṛṣṇa.	In	the	
Brahma-	saṁhitā
	it	is	stated	that	only	a	person	whose
eyes	are	smeared	with	the	ointment	of	love	can	see	the	beautiful	form	of	Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	51
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
द ृ ᇾ ट ् व े द ं
	
म ा न ु ष ं
	
ኅ प ं
	
त व
	
स ौ ᇸ य ं
	
ज न ा द ᆼ न
	
।
इ द ा न ी म ि ᇿ म
	
स ं व ृ ሧ ः
	
स च े त ा ः
	
प ् र क ृ ि त ं
	
ग त ः
	
॥
५ १
॥
arjuna	uvāca
dṛṣṭvedaṁ	mānuṣaṁ	rūpaṁ
tava	saumyaṁ	janārdana
idānīm	asmi	saṁvṛttaḥ
sa-cetāḥ	prakṛtiṁ	gataḥ
arjunaḥ	uvāca
—Arjuna	said;	
dṛṣṭvā—
seeing;	
idam
—this;	
mānuṣam
—
human	being;	
rūpam
—form;	
tava
—Your;	
saumyam
—very	beautiful;
janārdana
—O	chastiser	of	the	enemies;	
idānīm
—just	now;	
asmi
—I	am;
saṁvṛttaḥ
—settled;	
sa-cetāḥ
—in	my	consciousness;	
prakṛtim
—my	own;
gataḥ
—I	am.TRANSLATION
When	Arjuna	thus	saw	Kṛṣṇa	in	His	original	form,	he	said:	Seeing	this
humanlike	form,	so	very	beautiful,	my	mind	is	now	pacified,	and	I	am
restored	to	my	original	nature.
PURPORT
Here	the	words	
mānuṣaṁ	rūpam
	clearly	indicate	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead	to	be	originally	two-handed.	Those	who	deride	Kṛṣṇa	to	be	an
ordinary	person	are	shown	here	to	be	ignorant	of	His	divine	nature.	If	Kṛṣṇa	is
like	an	ordinary	human	being,	then	how	is	it	possible	for	Him	to	show	the
universal	form	and	again	to	show	the	four-handed	Nārāyaṇa	form?	So	it	is
very	clearly	stated	in	
Bhagavad-gītā	
that	one	who	thinks	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	an
ordinary	person	and	misguides	the	reader	by	claiming	that	it	is	the	impersonal
Brahman	within	Kṛṣṇa	speaking,	is	doing	the	greatest	injustice.	Kṛṣṇa	has
actually	shown	His	universal	form	and	His	fourhanded	Viṣṇu	form.	So	how
can	He	be	an	ordinary	human	being?	A	pure	devotee	is	not	confused	by
misguiding	commentaries	on	
Bhagavad-gītā	
because	he	knows	what	is	what.
The	original	verses	of	
Bhagavad-gītā	
are	as	clear	as	the	sun;	they	do	not
require	lamplight	from	foolish	commentators.
TEXT	52
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
स ु द ु द ᆼ श ᆼ ि म द ं
	
ኅ प ं
	
द ृ ᇾ ट व ा न ि स
	
य ᇳ म म
	
।
द े व ा
	
अ ᇴ य ᇿ य
	
ኅ प ᇿ य
	
ि न ᇰ य ं
	
द श ᆼ न क ा ङ ् ि ᇤ ण ः
	
॥
५ २
॥
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
sudurdarśam	idaṁ	rūpaṁ
dṛṣṭavān	asi	yan	mama
devā	apy	asya	rūpasya
nityaṁ	darśana-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
sudur-darśana—
	very	difficult	to	be	seen;	
idam
—this;	
rūpam
—form;	
dṛṣṭavān	asi—
as	you	have	seen;	
yat—
which;	
mama
—of	Mine;	
devāḥ—
the	demigods;	
api
asya
—also	this;	
rūpasya
—of	the	form;	
nityam
—eternally;	
darśana-
kāṅkṣiṇaḥ—
always	aspire	to	see.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	My	dear	Arjuna,	the	form	which	you	are	now
seeing	is	very	difficult	to	behold.	Even	the	demigods	are	ever	seeking	the
opportunity	to	see	this	form	which	is	so	dear.
PURPORT
In	the	forty-eighth	verse	of	this	chapter	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	concluded	revealing	His
universal	form	and	informed	Arjuna	that	this	form	is	not	possible	to	be	seen
by	so	many	activities,	sacrifices,	etc.	Now	here	the	word	
sudurdarśam	
isused,
indicating	that	Kṛṣṇa's	two-handed	form	is	still	more	confidential.	One	may	be
able	to	see	the	universal	form	of	Kṛṣṇa	by	adding	a	little	tinge	of	devotional
service	to	various	activities	like	penance,	Vedic	study	and	philosophical
speculation,	etc.	It	may	be	possible,	but	without	a	tinge	of	
bhakti,	
one	cannot
see;	that	has	already	been	explained.	Still,	beyond	that	universal	form,	the
form	of	Kṛṣṇa	as	a	two-handed	man	is	still	more	difficult	to	see,	even	for
demigods	like	Brahmā	and	Lord	Śiva.	They	desire	to	see	Him,	and	we	have
evidences	in	the	
Śrīmad-	Bhāgavatam	
that	when	He	was	supposed	to	be	in	the
womb	of	His	mother,	Devakī,	all	the	demigods	from	heaven	came	to	see	the
marvel	of	Kṛṣṇa.	They	even	waited	to	see	Him.	A	foolish	person	may	deride
Him,	but	that	is	an	ordinary	person.	Kṛṣṇa	is	actually	desired	to	be	seen	by
demigods	like	Brahmā	and	Śiva	in	His	two-armed	form.
In	
Bhagavad-gītā	
it	is	also	confirmed	that	He	is	not	visible	to	the	foolish
persons	who	deride	Him.	Kṛṣṇa's	body,	as	confirmed	by	
Brahmā-saṁhitā	
and
confirmed	by	Himself	in	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
iscompletely	spiritual	and	full	of
bliss	and	eternality.	His	body	is	never	like	a	material	body.	But	for	some	who
make	a	study	of	Kṛṣṇa	by	reading	
Bhagavad-gītā	
or	similar	Vedic	scriptures,
Kṛṣṇa	is	a	problem.	For	one	using	a	material	process,	Kṛṣṇa	is	considered	to
be	a	great	historical	personality	and	very	learned	philosopher.	But	He	isn't	an
ordinary	man.	But	some	think	that	even	though	He	was	so	powerful,	He	had	toaccept	a	material	body.	Ultimately	they	think	that	the	Absolute	Truth	is
impersonal;	therefore	they	think	that	from	His	impersonal	feature	He	assumed
a	personal	feature	attached	to	material	nature.	This	is	a	materialistic
calculation	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	Another	calculation	is	speculative.	Those
who	are	in	search	of	knowledge	also	speculate	on	Kṛṣṇa	and	consider	Him	to
be	less	important	than	the	universal	form	of	the	Supreme.	Thus	some	think
that	the	universal	form	of	Kṛṣṇa	which	was	manifested	to	Arjuna	is	more
important	than	His	personal	form.	According	to	them,	the	personal	form	of	the
Supreme	is	something	imaginary.	They	believe	that	in	the	ultimate	issue,	the
Absolute	Truth	is	not	a	person.	But	the	transcendental	process	is	described	in
Bhagavad-gītā,	
Chapter	Two:	to	hear	about	Kṛṣṇa	from	authorities.	That	is	the
actual	Vedic	process,	and	those	who	are	actually	in	the	Vedic	line	hear	about
Kṛṣṇa	from	authority,	and	by	repeated	hearing	about	Him,	Kṛṣṇa	becomes
dear.	As	we	have	several	times	discussed,	Kṛṣṇa	is	covered	by	His	
yoga-māyā
potency.	He	is	not	to	be	seen	or	revealed	to	anyone	and	everyone.	Only	by	one
to	whom	He	reveals	Himself	can	He	be	seen.	This	is	confirmed	in	Vedic
literature;	for	one	who	is	a	surrendered	soul,	the	Absolute	Truth	can	actually
be	understood.	The	transcendentalist,	by	continuous	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and
by	devotional	service	to	Kṛṣṇa,	can	have	his	spiritual	eyes	opened	and	can	see
Kṛṣṇa	by	revelation.	Such	a	revelation	is	not	possible	even	for	the	demigods;
therefore	it	is	difficult	even	for	the	demigods	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa,	and	the
advanced	demigods	are	always	in	hope	of	seeing	Kṛṣṇa	in	His	two-handed
form.	The	conclusion	is	that	although	to	see	the	universal	form	of	Kṛṣṇa	is
very,	very	difficult	and	not	possible	for	anyone	and	everyone,	it	is	still	more
difficult	to	understand	His	personal	form	as	Śyāmasundara.
TEXT	53
न ा ह ं
	
व े द ै न ᆼ
	
त प स ा
	
न
	
द ा न े न
	
न
	
च े ᇬ य य ा
	
।
श ᇧ य
	
ए व ं ि व ध ो
	
द ् र ᇾ ट ु ं
	
द ृ ᇾ ट व ा न ि स
	
म ा ं
	
य थ ा
	
॥
५ ३
॥
nāhaṁ	vedair	na	tapasā
na	dānena	na	cejyayā
śakya	evaṁ-vidho	draṣṭuṁ
dṛṣṭavān	asi	māṁ	yathāna
—never;	
aham
—I;	
vedaiḥ—
by	study	of	the	
Vedas;	na
—never;	
tapasā—
by	serious	penances;	
na
—never;	
dānena—
by	charity;	
na
—never;	
ca
—also;
ijyayā—
by	worship;	
śakyaḥ—
isit	possible;	
evam-vidhaḥ—
like	this;	
draṣṭum
—to	see;	
dṛṣṭavān
—seeing;	
asi
—you	are;	
mām
—Me;	
yathā
—as.
TRANSLATION
The	form	which	you	are	seeing	with	your	transcendental	eyes	cannot	be
understood	simply	by	studying	the	Vedas,	nor	by	undergoing	serious
penances,	nor	by	charity,	nor	by	worship.	It	is	not	by	these	means	that
one	can	see	Me	as	I	am.
PURPORT
Kṛṣṇa	first	appeared	before	His	parents	Devakī	and	Vasudeva	in	a	four-
handed	form,	and	then	He	transformed	Himself	into	the	two-handed	form.
This	mystery	is	very	difficult	to	understand	for	those	who	are	atheists	or	who
are	devoid	of	devotional	service.	For	scholars	who	have	simply	studied	Vedic
literature	by	way	of	speculation	or	out	of	mere	academic	interest,	Kṛṣṇa	is	not
easy	to	understand.	Nor	is	He	to	he	understood	by	persons	who	officially	go	to
the	temple	to	offer	worship.	They	make	their	visit,	but	they	cannot	understand
Kṛṣṇa	as	He	is.	Kṛṣṇa	can	be	understood	only	through	the	path	of	devotional
service,	as	explained	by	Kṛṣṇa	Himself	in	the	next	verse.
TEXT	54
भ ᇧ ᇰ य ा
	
ᇰ व न ᇳ य य ा
	
श ᇧ य
	
अ ह म े व ं ि व ध ो ऽ ज ु ᆼ न
	
।
ᇥ ा त ु ं
	
द ् र ᇾ ट ु ं
	
च
	
त ᇰ ᇰ व े न
	
प ् र व े ᇾ ट ु ं
	
च
	
प र ᇳ त प
	
॥
५ ४
॥
bhaktyā	tv	ananyayā	śakya
aham	evaṁ-vidho	'rjuna
jñātuṁ	draṣṭuṁ	ca	tattvena
praveṣṭuṁ	ca	parantapa
bhaktyā—
by	devotional	service;	
tu—
but;	
ananyayā—
without	being	mixedwith	fruitive	activities	or	speculative	knowledge;	
śakyaḥ
—possible;	
aham—
I;
evam-vidhaḥ—
like	this;	
arjuna
—O	Arjuna;	
jñātum—
to	know;	
draṣṭum—
to
see;	
tattvena—
in	fact;	
praveṣṭum
—and	to	enter	into;	
ca
—also;	
parantapa—
O
mighty-armed	one.
TRANSLATION
My	dear	Arjuna,	only	by	undivided	devotional	service	can	I	be
understood	as	I	am,	standing	before	you,	and	can	thus	be	seen	directly.
Only	in	this	way	can	you	enter	into	the	mysteries	of	My	understanding.
PURPORT
Kṛṣṇa	can	be	understood	only	by	the	process	of	undivided	devotional
service.	He	explicitly	explains	this	in	this	verse	so	unauthorized
commentators,	who	try	to	understand	
Bhagavad-gītā	
by	the	speculative
process,	will	know	that	they	are	simply	wasting	their	time.	No	one	can
understand	Kṛṣṇa	or	how	He	came	from	parents	in	a	four-handed	form	and	at
once	changed	Himself	into	a	two-handed	form.	It	is	clearly	stated	here	that	no
one	can	see	Him.	Those	who,	however,	are	very	experienced	students	of	Vedic
literature	can	learn	about	Him	from	the	Vedic	literature	in	so	many	ways.
There	are	so	many	rules	and	regulations,	and	if	one	at	all	wants	to	understand
Kṛṣṇa,	he	must	follow	the	regulative	principles	described	in	the	authoritative
literature.	One	can	perform	penance	in	accordance	with	those	principles.	As
far	as	charity	is	concerned,	it	is	plain	that	charity	should	be	given	to	the
devotees	of	Kṛṣṇa	who	are	engaged	in	His	devotional	service	to	spread	the
Kṛṣṇa	philosophy	or	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	throughout	the	world.	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	a	benediction	to	humanity.	Lord	Caitanya	was	appreciated	by
Rūpa	Gosvāmī	as	the	most	munificent	man	of	charity	because	love	of	Kṛṣṇa,
which	is	very	difficult	to	achieve,	was	distributed	freely	by	Him.	And	if	one
worships	as	prescribed	in	the	temple	(in	the	temples	in	India	there	is	always
some	statue,	usually	of	Viṣṇu	or	Kṛṣṇa),	that	is	a	chance	to	progress.	For	the
beginners	in	devotional	service	to	the	Lord,	temple	worship	is	very	essential,
and	this	is	confirmed	in	the	Vedic	literature.
One	who	has	unflinching	devotion	for	the	Supreme	Lord	and	is	directed	by
the	spiritual	master	can	see	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	byrevelation.	For	one	who	does	not	take	personal	training	under	the	guidance	of
a	bona	fide	spiritual	master,	it	is	impossible	to	even	begin	to	understand
Kṛṣṇa.	The	word	
tu
	is	specifically	used	here	to	indicate	that	no	other	process
can	be	used,	can	be	recommended,	or	can	be	successful	in	understanding
Kṛṣṇa.
The	personal	forms	of	Kṛṣṇa,	the	two-handed	form	and	the	four-	handed,
are	completely	different	from	the	temporary	universal	form	shown	to	Arjuna.
The	four-handed	form	is	Nārāyaṇa,	and	the	two-handed	form	is	Kṛṣṇa;	they
are	eternal	and	transcendental,	whereas	the	universal	form	exhibited	to	Arjuna
is	temporary.	The	very	word	
sudurdarśam,	
meaning	difficult	to	see,	suggests
that	no	one	saw	that	universal	form.	It	also	suggests	that	amongst	the	devotees
there	was	no	necessity	of	showing	it.	That	form	was	exhibited	by	Kṛṣṇa	at	the
request	of	Arjuna	because	in	the	future,	when	one	represents	himself	as	an
incarnation	of	God,	people	can	ask	to	see	his	universal	form.
Kṛṣṇa	changes	from	the	universal	form	to	the	four-handed	form	of
Nārāyaṇa	and	then	to	His	own	natural	form	of	two	hands.	This	indicates	that
the	four-handed	forms	and	other	forms	mentioned	in	Vedic	literature	are	all
emanations	of	the	original	two-handed	Kṛṣṇa.	He	is	the	origin	of	all
emanations.	Kṛṣṇa	is	distinct	even	from	these	forms,	not	to	speak	of	the
impersonal	conception.	As	far	as	the	four-handed	forms	of	Kṛṣṇa	are
concerned,	it	is	stated	clearly	that	even	the	most	identical	four-handed	form	of
Kṛṣṇa	(which	is	known	as	Mahā-Viṣṇu,	who	is	lying	on	the	cosmic	ocean	and
from	whose	breathing	so	many	innumerable	universes	are	passing	out	and
entering)	is	also	an	expansion	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	Therefore	one	should
conclusively	worship	the	personal	form	of	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead	who	is	eternity,	bliss	and	knowledge.	He	is	the	source	of	all	forms
of	Viṣṇu,	He	is	the	source	of	all	forms	of	incarnation,	and	He	is	the	original
Supreme	Personality,	as	confirmed	in	
Bhagavad-gītā.
In	the	Vedic	literature	it	is	stated	that	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth	is	a
person.	His	name	is	Kṛṣṇa,	and	He	sometimes	descends	on	this	earth.
Similarly,	in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
there	is	a	description	of	all	kinds	of
incarnations	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	and	there	it	is	said	that
Kṛṣṇa	is	not	an	incarnation	of	God	but	is	the	original	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead	Himself.	
Kṛṣṇas	tu	bhagavān	svayam.	
Similarly,	in	
Bhagavad-gītā
the	Lord	says,	
mattaḥ	parataram	nānyāt:	
"There	is	nothing	superior	to	My
form	as	the	Personality	of	Godhead	Kṛṣṇa."	He	also	says	elsewhere	in
Bhagavad-gītā,	aham	ādir	hi	devānām:
	"I	am	the	origin	of	all	the	demigods."And	after	understanding	
Bhagavad-gītā	
from	Kṛṣṇa,	Arjuna	also	confirms	this
in	the	following	words:	
paraṁ	brahma	paraṁ	dhāma	pavitraṁ	paramaṁ
bhavān:
	"I	now	fully	understand	that	You	are	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead,	the	Absolute	Truth,	and	that	You	are	the	refuge	of	everything."
Therefore	the	universal	form	which	Kṛṣṇa	showed	to	Arjuna	is	not	the	original
form	of	God.	The	original	is	the	Kṛṣṇa	form.	The	universal	form,	with	its
thousands	and	thousands	of	heads	and	hands,	is	manifest	just	to	draw	the
attention	of	those	who	have	no	love	for	God.	It	is	not	God's	original	form.
The	universal	form	is	not	attractive	for	pure	devotees,	who	are	in	love	with
the	Lord	in	different	transcendental	relationships.	The	Supreme	Godhead
exchanges	transcendental	love	in	His	original	form	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Therefore	to
Arjuna,	who	was	so	intimately	related	with	Kṛṣṇa	in	friendship,	this	form	of
the	universal	manifestation	was	not	pleasing;	rather,	it	was	fearful.	Arjuna,
who	is	a	constant	companion	of	Kṛṣṇa's,	must	have	had	transcendental	eyes;
he	was	not	an	ordinary	man.	Therefore	he	was	not	captivated	by	the	universal
form.	This	form	may	seem	wonderful	to	persons	who	are	involved	in	elevating
themselves	by	fruitive	activities,	but	to	persons	who	are	engaged	in	devotional
service,	the	two-handed	form	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	mostdear.
TEXT	55
म ᇰ क म ᆼ क ृ ᇳ म ᇰ प र म ो
	
म द ् भ ᇧ त ः
	
स ङ ् ग व ि ज ᆼ त ः
	
।
ि न व ᆺ र ः
	
स व ᆼ भ ू त े ष ु
	
य ः
	
स
	
म ा म े ि त
	
प ा ᇯ ड व
	
॥
५ ५
॥
mat-karma-kṛn	mat-paramo
mad-bhaktaḥ	saṅga-varjitaḥ
nirvairaḥ	sarva-bhūteṣu
yaḥ	sa	mām	eti	pāṇḍava
mat-karma-kṛt
—engaged	in	doing	My	work;	
mat-paramaḥ
—concerning
Me,	the	Supreme;	
mat-bhaktaḥ
—engaged	in	My	devotional	service;	
saṅga-
varjitaḥ—
freed	from	the	contamination	of	previous	activities	and	mental
speculation;	
nirvairaḥ
—without	an	enemy;	
sarva-bhūteṣu
—to	every	living
entity;	
yaḥ
—one	who;	
saḥ
—he;	
mām
—unto	Me;	
eti
—comes;	
pāṇḍava
—O
son	of	Pāṇḍu.TRANSLATION
My	dear	Arjuna,	one	who	is	engaged	in	My	pure	devotional	service,
free	from	the	contaminations	of	previous	activities	and	from	mental
speculation,	who	is	friendly	to	every	living	entity,	certainly	comes	to	Me.
PURPORT
Anyone	who	wants	to	approach	the	Supreme	of	all	the	Personalities	of
Godhead,	on	the	Kṛṣṇaloka	planet	in	the	spiritual	sky,	and	be	intimately
connected	with	the	Supreme	Personality,	Kṛṣṇa,	must	take	this	formula,	as	is
stated	by	the	Supreme	Himself.	Therefore,	this	verse	is	considered	to	be	the
essence	of	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
The	
Bhagavad-gītā	
isa	book	directed	to	the
conditioned	souls,	who	are	engaged	in	the	material	world	with	the	purpose	of
lording	it	over	nature	and	who	do	not	know	of	the	real,	spiritual	life.	The
Bhagavad-gītā	
ismeant	to	show	how	one	can	understand	his	spiritual
existence	and	his	eternal	relationship	with	the	Supreme	Spiritual	Personality
and	to	teach	one	how	to	go	back	home,	back	to	Godhead.	Now	here	is	the
verse	which	clearly	explains	the	process	by	which	one	can	attain	success	in	his
spiritual	activity:	devotional	service.	As	far	as	work	is	concerned,	one	should
transfer	his	energy	entirely	to	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	activities.	No	work	should	be
done	by	any	man	except	in	relationship	to	Kṛṣṇa.	This	called	Kṛṣṇa-
karma
.
One	may	be	engaged	in	various	activities,	but	one	should	not	be	attached	to
the	result	of	his	work,	but	the	result	should	be	done	for	Him.	For	example,	one
may	be	engaged	in	business,	but	to	transform	that	activity	into	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	one	has	to	do	business	for	Kṛṣṇa.	If	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	proprietor	of
the	business,	then	Kṛṣṇa	should	enjoy	the	profit	of	the	business.	If	a
businessman	is	in	possession	of	thousands	and	thousands	of	dollars,	and	if	he
has	to	offer	all	this	to	Kṛṣṇa,	he	can	do	it.	This	is	work	for	Kṛṣṇa.	Instead	of
constructing	a	big	building	for	his	sense	gratification,	he	can	construct	a	nice
temple	for	Kṛṣṇa,	and	he	can	install	the	Deity	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	arrange	for	the
Deity's	service,	as	is	outlined	in	the	authorized	books	of	devotional	service.
This	is	all	Kṛṣṇa-
karma
.	One	should	not	be	attached	to	the	result	of	his	work,
but	the	result	should	be	offered	to	Kṛṣṇa.	One	should	also	accept	as	
prasādam,
food,	the	remnants	of	offerings	to	Kṛṣṇa.	If,	however,	one	is	not	able	toconstruct	a	temple	for	Kṛṣṇa,	one	can	engage	himself	in	cleansing	the	temple
of	Kṛṣṇa;	that	is	also	Kṛṣṇa-
karma
.	One	can	cultivate	a	garden.	Anyone	who
has	land—in	India,	at	least,	any	poor	man	has	a	certain	amount	of	land—can
utilize	that	for	Kṛṣṇa	by	growing	flowers	to	offer	Him.	He	can	sow	
tulasī
plants	because	
tulasī
	leaves	are	very	important,	and	Kṛṣṇa	has	recommended
this	in	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
Kṛṣṇa	desires	that	one	offer	Him	either	a	leaf,	or	a
flower,	or	a	little	water-and	He	is	satisfied.	This	leaf	especially	refers	to	the
tulasī	
So	one	can	sow	
tulasī	
leaves	and	pour	water	on	the	plant.	Thus,	even	the
poorest	man	can	engage	in	the	service	of	Kṛṣṇa.	These	are	some	of	the
examples	of	how	one	can	engage	in	working	for	Kṛṣṇa.
The	word	
mat-paramaḥ	
refers	to	one	who	considers	the	association	of
Kṛṣṇa	in	His	supreme	abode	to	be	the	highest	perfection	of	life.	Such	a	person
does	not	wish	to	be	elevated	to	the	higher	planets	such	as	the	moon	or	sun	or
heavenly	planets,	or	even	the	highest	planet	of	this	universe,	Brahmaloka.	He
has	no	attraction	for	that.	He	is	only	attracted	to	being	transferred	to	the
spiritual	sky.	And	even	in	the	spiritual	sky	he	is	not	satisfied	with	merging	into
the	glowing	
brahmajyoti	
effulgence,	for	he	wants	to	enter	the	highest	spiritual
planet,	namely	Kṛṣṇaloka,	Goloka	Vṛndāvana.	He	has	full	knowledge	of	that
planet,	and	therefore	he	is	not	interested	in	any	other.	As	indicated	by	the
word	
mad-bhaktaḥ,	
he	fully	engages	in	devotional	service,	specifically	in	the
nine	processes	of	devotional	engagement:	hearing,	chanting,	remembering,
worshiping,	serving	the	lotus	feet	of	the	Lord,	offering	prayers,	carrying	out
the	orders	of	the	Lord,	making	friends	with	Him,	and	surrendering	everything
to	Him.	One	can	engage	in	all	nine	devotional	processes,	or	eight,	or	seven,	or
at	least	in	one,	and	that	will	surely	make	one	perfect.
The	term	
saṅga-varjitaḥ
	is	very	significant.	One	should	disassociate
himself	from	persons	who	are	against	Kṛṣṇa.	Not	only	are	the	atheistic	persons
against	Kṛṣṇa,	but	also	those	who	are	attracted	to	fruitive	activities	and	mental
speculation.	Therefore	the	pure	form	of	devotional	service	is	described	in
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu	
as	follows:	
anyābhilāṣitā-	śūnyaṁ	jñāna-karmādy-
anāvṛtam	ānukūlyena	kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ	bhaktir	uttamā.	
In	this	verse	Śrīla	Rūpa
Gosvāmī	clearly	states	that	if	anyone	wants	to	execute	unalloyed	devotional
service,	he	must	be	freed	from	all	kinds	of	material	contamination.	He	must	be
freed	from	the	association	of	persons	who	are	addicted	to	fruitive	activities
and	mental	speculation.	When,	freed	from	such	unwanted	association	and
from	the	contamination	of	material	desires,	one	favorably	cultivates
knowledge	of	Kṛṣṇa,	that	is	called	pure	devotional	service.	
Ānukūlyasyasaṅkaplaḥ	prātikūlyasya	varjanam
.	One	should	think	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	act	for
Kṛṣṇa	favorably,	not	unfavorably.	Kaṁsa	was	an	enemy	of	Kṛṣṇa's.	From	the
very	beginning	of	Kṛṣṇa's	birth,	he	planned	in	so	many	ways	to	kill	Him,	and
because	he	was	always	unsuccessful,	he	was	always	thinking	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Thus
while	working,	while	eating	and	while	sleeping,	he	was	always	Kṛṣṇa
conscious	in	every	respect,	but	that	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	was	not	favorable,
and	therefore	in	spite	of	his	always	thinking	of	Kṛṣṇa	twenty-four	hours	a	day,
he	was	considered	a	demon,	and	Kṛṣṇa	at	last	killed	him.	Of	course	anyone
who	is	killed	by	Kṛṣṇa	attains	salvation	immediately,	but	that	is	not	the	aim	of
the	pure	devotee.	The	pure	devotee	does	not	even	want	salvation.	He	does	not
want	to	be	transferred	even	to	the	highest	planet,	Goloka	Vṛndāvana.	His	only
objective	is	to	serve	Kṛṣṇa	wherever	he	may	be.
A	devotee	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	friendly	to	everyone.	Therefore	it	is	said	here	that	he
has	no	enemy.	How	is	this?	A	devotee	situated	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	knows
that	only	devotional	service	to	Kṛṣṇa	can	relieve	a	person	from	all	the
problems	of	life.	He	has	personal	experience	of	this,	and	therefore	he	wants	to
introduce	this	system,	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	into	human	society.	There	are
many	examples	in	history	of	devotees	of	the	Lord	risking	their	lives	for	the
spreading	of	God	consciousness.	The	favorite	example	is	Lord	Jesus	Christ.
He	was	crucified	by	the	nondevotees,	but	He	sacrificed	His	life	for	spreading
God	consciousness.	Of	course,	it	would	be	superficial	to	understand	that	He
was	killed.	Similarly,	in	India	also	there	are	many	examples,	such	as	Ṭhākur
Haridāsa.	Why	such	risk?	Because	they	wanted	to	spread	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	and	it	is	difficult.	A	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	person	knows	that	if	a
man	is	suffering,	it	is	due	to	his	forgetfulness	of	his	eternal	relationship	with
Kṛṣṇa.	Therefore,	the	highest	benefit	one	can	render	to	human	society	is
relieving	one's	neighbor	from	all	material	problems.	In	such	a	way,	a	pure
devotee	is	engaged	in	the	service	of	the	Lord.	Now,	we	can	imagine	how
merciful	Kṛṣṇa	is	to	those	engaged	in	His	service,	risking	everything	for	Him.
Therefore	it	is	certain	that	such	persons	must	reach	the	supreme	planet	after
leaving	the	body.
In	summary,	the	universal	form	of	Kṛṣṇa,	which	is	a	temporary
manifestation,	and	the	form	of	time	which	devours	everything,	and	even	the
form	of	Viṣṇu,	four-handed,	have	all	been	exhibited	by	Kṛṣṇa.	Thus	Kṛṣṇa	is
the	origin	of	all	these	manifestations.	It	is	not	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	a	manifestation	of
the	original	
viśva-rūpa,	
or	Viṣṇu.	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	origin	of	all	forms.	There	are
hundreds	and	thousands	of	Viṣṇus,	but	for	a	devotee,	no	form	of	Kṛṣṇa	isimportant	but	the	original	form,	two-handed	Śyāmasundara.	In	the	
Brahmā-
saṁhitā	
it	is	stated	that	those	who	are	attached	to	the	Śyāmasundara	form	of
Kṛṣṇa	in	love	and	devotion	can	see	Him	always	within	the	heart	and	cannot
see	anything	else.	One	should	understand,	therefore,	that	the	purport	of	this
Eleventh	Chapter	is	that	the	form	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	essential	and	supreme.
Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	Eleventh	Chapter	of	the
Śrīmad-Bhagavad-gītā
	in	the	matter	of	the	Universal	Form.Chapter-12
CHAPTER	TWELVE
Devotional	Service
TEXT	1
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
ए व ं
	
स त त य ु ᇧ त ा
	
य े
	
भ ᇧ त ा ᇿ ᇰ व ा ं
	
प य ु ᆼ प ा स त े
	
।
य े
	
च ा ᇴ य ᇤ र म ᇼ य ᇧ त ं
	
त े ष ा ं
	
क े
	
य ो ग ि व ሧ म ा ः
	
॥
१
॥
arjuna	uvāca
evaṁ	satata-yuktā	ye
bhaktās	tvāṁ	paryupāsate
ye	cāpy	akṣaram	avyaktaṁteṣāṁ	ke	yoga-vittamāḥ
arjunaḥ	uvāca—
Arjuna	said;	
evam—
thus;	
satata—
always;
	yuktāḥ
—
engaged;	
ye—
those;	
bhaktāḥ—
devotees;	
tvām—
unto	You;	
paryupāsate
—
properly	worship;	
ye—
those;	
ca—
also;
	api—
again;
	akṣaram
—beyond	the
senses;	
avyaktam
—unmanifested;	
teśām—
of	them;	
ke—
who;	
yoga-vittamāḥ
—
the	most	perfect.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	inquired:	Which	is	considered	to	be	more	perfect:	those	who
are	properly	engaged	in	Your	devotional	service,	or	those	who	worship
the	impersonal	Brahman,	the	unmanifested?
PURPORT
Kṛṣṇa	has	now	explained	about	the	personal,	the	impersonal	and	the
universal	and	has	described	all	kinds	of	devotees	and	
yogīs
.	Generally,	the
transcendentalists	can	be	divided	into	two	classes.	One	is	the	impersonalist,
and	the	other	is	the	personalist.	The	personalist	devotee	engages	himself	with
all	energy	in	the	service	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	The	impersonalist	engages
himself	not	directly	in	the	service	of	Kṛṣṇa	but	in	meditation	on	the
impersonal	Brahman,	the	unmanifested.
We	find	in	this	chapter	that	of	the	different	processes	for	realization	of	the
Absolute	Truth,	
bhakti-yoga,	
devotional	service,	is	the	highest.	If	one	at	all
desires	to	have	the	association	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	then
he	must	take	to	devotional	service.
Those	who	worship	the	Supreme	Lord	directly	by	devotional	service	are
called	personalists.	Those	who	engage	themselves	in	meditation	on	the
impersonal	Brahman	are	called	impersonalists.	Arjuna	is	here	questioning
which	position	is	better.	There	are	different	ways	to	realize	the	Absolute
Truth,	but	Kṛṣṇa	indicates	in	this	chapter	that	
bhakti-yoga,	
or	devotional
service	to	Him,	is	highest	of	all.	It	is	the	most	direct,	and	it	is	the	easiest
means	for	association	with	the	Godhead.
In	the	Second	Chapter	the	Lord	explains	that	a	living	entity	is	not	the
material	body	but	is	a	spiritual	spark,	a	part	of	the	Absolute	Truth.	In	the
Seventh	Chapter	He	speaks	of	the	living	entity	as	part	and	parcel	of	thesupreme	whole	and	recommends	that	he	transfer	his	attention	fully	to	the
whole.	In	the	Eighth	Chapter	it	is	stated	that	whoever	thinks	of	Kṛṣṇa	at	the
moment	of	death	is	at	once	transferred	to	the	spiritual	sky,	Kṛṣṇa's	abode.	And
at	the	end	of	the	Sixth	Chapter	the	Lord	says	that	out	of	all	the	
yogīs,	
he	who
thinks	of	Kṛṣṇa	within	himself	is	considered	to	be	the	most	perfect.	So
throughout	the	
Gītā	
personal	devotion	to	Kṛṣṇa	is	recommended	as	the	highest
form	of	spiritual	realization.	Yet	there	are	those	who	are	still	attracted	to
Kṛṣṇa's	impersonal	
brahmajyoti	
effulgence,	which	is	the	all-pervasive	aspect
of	the	Absolute	Truth	and	which	is	unmanifest	and	beyond	the	reach	of	the
senses.	Arjuna	would	like	to	know	which	of	these	two	types	of
transcendentalists	is	more	perfect	in	knowledge.	In	other	words,	he	is
clarifying	his	own	position	because	he	is	attached	to	the	personal	form	of
Kṛṣṇa.	He	is	not	attached	to	the	impersonal	Brahman.	He	wants	to	know
whether	his	position	is	secure.	The	impersonal	manifestation,	either	in	this
material	world	or	in	the	spiritual	world	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	is	a	problem	for
meditation.	Actually,	one	cannot	perfectly	conceive	of	the	impersonal	feature
of	the	Absolute	Truth.	Therefore	Arjuna	wants	to	say,	"What	is	the	use	of	such
a	waste	of	time?"	Arjuna	experienced	in	the	Eleventh	Chapter	that	to	be
attached	to	the	personal	form	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	best	because	he	could	thus
understand	all	other	forms	at	the	same	time	and	there	was	no	disturbance	to
his	love	for	Kṛṣṇa.	This	important	question	asked	of	Kṛṣṇa	by	Arjuna	will
clarify	the	distinction	between	the	impersonal	and	personal	conceptions	of	the
Absolute	Truth.
TEXT	2
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
म ᇹ य ा व े ᇽ य
	
म न ो
	
य े
	
म ा ं
	
ि न ᇰ य य ु ᇧ त ा
	
उ प ा स त े
	
।
श ् र ሬ य ा
	
प र य ो प े त ा ᇿ त े
	
म े
	
य ु ᇧ त त म ा
	
म त ा ः
	
॥
२
॥
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
mayy	āveśya	mano	ye	māṁ
nitya-yuktā	upāsate
śraddhayā	parayopetās
te	me	yuktatamā	matāḥ
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
mayi
—unto	Me;	
āveśya
—fixing;	
manaḥ
—mind;	
ye
—one	who;	
mām
—unto	Me;	
nitya
—always;	
yuktāḥ
—engaged;	
upāsate
—worships;	
śraddhayā
—with	faith;
parayā
—transcendental;	
upetāḥ
—engages;	
te
—they;	
me
—Mine;	
yuktatamāḥ
—most	perfect;	
matāḥ
—I	consider.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	He	whose	mind	is	fixed	on	My	personal	form,
always	engaged	in	worshiping	Me	with	great	and	transcendental	faith,	is
considered	by	Me	to	be	most	perfect.
PURPORT
In	answer	to	Arjuna's	question,	Kṛṣṇa	clearly	says	that	he	who	concentrates
upon	His	personal	form	and	who	worships	Him	with	faith	and	devotion	is	to
be	considered	most	perfect	in	
yoga
.	For	one	in	such	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	there
are	no	material	activities	because	everything	is	done	by	Kṛṣṇa.	A	pure	devotee
is	constantly	engaged–sometimes	he	chants,	sometimes	he	hears	or	reads
books	about	Kṛṣṇa,	or	sometimes	he	cooks	
prasādam
	or	goes	to	the
marketplace	to	purchase	something	for	Kṛṣṇa,	or	sometimes	he	washes	the
temple	or	the	dishes-whatever	he	does,	he	does	not	let	a	single	moment	pass
without	devoting	his	activities	to	Kṛṣṇa.	Such	action	is	in	full	
samādhi.
TEXTS	3-4
य े
	
ᇰ व ᇤ र म ि न द ᆹ ᇽ य म ᇼ य ᇧ त ं
	
प य ु ᆼ प ा स त े
	
।
स व ᆼ त ् र ग म ि च ᇳ ᇰ य ᇮ च
	
क ू ट ᇿ थ म च ल ᇳ ध ् ኄ व म ्
	
॥
३
॥
स ि ᇳ न य ᇸ य े ि ᇳ द ् र य ग ् र ा म ं
	
स व ᆼ त ् र
	
स म ब ु ሬ य ः
	
।
त े
	
प ् र ा ᇴ न ु व ि ᇳ त
	
म ा म े व
	
स व ᆼ भ ू त ि ह त े
	
र त ा ः
	
॥
४
॥
ye	tv	akṣaram	anirdeśyam
avyaktaṁ	paryupāsate
sarvatra-gam	acintyaṁ	ca
kūṭastham	acalaṁ	dhruvam
sanniyamyendriya-grāmaṁ
sarvatra	sama-buddhayaḥte	prāpnuvanti	mām	eva
sarva-bhūta-hite	ratāḥ
ye
—those;	
tu
—but;	
akṣaram
—which	is	beyond	the	perception	of	the
senses;	
anirdeśyam
—indefinite;	
avyaktam
—unmanifested;	
paryupāsate
—
completely	 engages;	
sarvatra-gam
—all-pervading;	
acintyam
—
inconceivable;	
ca
—also;	
kūṭastham—
in	the	center;	
acalam—
immovable;
dhruvam—
fixed;	
sanniyamya	
—controlling;	
indriya-grāmam—
all	the	senses;
sarvatra
—everywhere;	
sama-	buddayaḥ—
equally	disposed;	
te
—they;
prāpnuvanti
—achieve;	
mām
—unto	Me;	
eva
—certainly;	
sarva-bhūta-hite—
all
living	entities'	welfare;	
ratāḥ
—engaged.
TRANSLATION
But	those	who	fully	worship	the	unmanifested,	that	which	lies	beyond
the	perception	of	the	senses,	the	all-pervading,	inconceivable,	fixed,	and
immovable—the	impersonal	conception	of	the	Absolute	Truth—by
controlling	the	various	senses	and	being	equally	disposed	to	everyone,
such	persons,	engaged	in	the	welfare	of	all,	at	last	achieve	Me.
PURPORT
Those	who	do	not	directly	worship	the	Supreme	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	but	who
attempt	to	achieve	the	same	goal	by	an	indirect	process,	also	ultimately
achieve	the	supreme	goal,	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa,	as	is	stated,	"After	many	births	the	man
of	wisdom	seeks	refuge	in	Me,	knowing	Vāsudeva	is	all."	When	a	person
comes	to	full	knowledge	after	many	births,	he	surrenders	unto	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.	If
one	approaches	the	Godhead	by	the	method	mentioned	in	this	verse,	he	has	to
control	the	senses,	render	service	to	everyone	and	engage	in	the	welfare	of	all
beings.	It	is	inferred	that	one	has	to	approach	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	otherwise	there	is
no	perfect	realization.	Often	there	is	much	penance	involved	before	one	fully
surrenders	unto	Him.
In	order	to	perceive	the	Supersoul	within	the	individual	soul,	one	has	to
cease	the	sensual	activities	of	seeing,	hearing,	tasting,	working,	etc.	Then	one
comes	to	understand	that	the	Supreme	Soul	is	present	everywhere.	Realizing
this,	one	envies	no	living	entity—he	sees	no	difference	between	man	and
animal	because	he	sees	soul	only,	not	the	outer	covering.	But	for	the	commonman,	this	method	of	impersonal	realization	is	very	difficult.
TEXT	5
ᇧ ल े श ो ऽ ि ध क त र ᇿ त े ष ा म ᇼ य ᇧ त ा स ᇧ त च े त स ा म ्
	
अ ᇼ य ᇧ त ा
	
ि ह
	
ग ि त द ु ᆼ ः ख ं
	
द े ह व द ् ि भ र व ा ᇴ य त े
	
॥
५
॥
kleśo	'dhikataras	teṣām
avyaktāsakta-cetasām
avyaktā	hi	gatir	duḥkhaṁ
dehavadbhir	avāpyate
kleśaḥ—
trouble;	
adhikataraḥ—
more	troublesome;	
teṣām—
of	them;	
avyakta
—
unmanifested;	
āsakta—
being	attached;	
cetasām—
of	those	whose	minds;
avyaktā—
unmanifested;	
hi—
certainly;	
gatiḥ	duḥkham—
progress	is
troublesome;	
dehavadbhiḥ—
of	the	embodiments;	
avāpyate—
achieve.
TRANSLATION
For	those	whose	minds	are	attached	to	the	unmanifested,	impersonal
feature	of	the	Supreme,	advancement	is	very	troublesome.	To	make
progress	in	that	discipline	is	always	difficult	for	those	who	are	embodied.
PURPORT
The	group	of	transcendentalists	who	follow	the	path	of	the	inconceivable,
unmanifested,	impersonal	feature	of	the	Supreme	Lord	are	called	
jñāna-yogīs,
and	persons	who	are	in	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	engaged	in	devotional
service	to	the	Lord,	are	called	
bhakti-yogīs.	
Now,	here	the	difference	between
jñāna-yoga	
and	
bhakti-yoga	
is	definitely	expressed.	The	process	of	
jñāna-
yoga,	
although	ultimately	bringing	one	to	the	same	goal,	is	very	troublesome,
whereas	the	path	of	
bhakti-yoga,	
the	process	of	being	in	direct	service	to	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	is	easier	and	is	natural	for	the	embodied
soul.	The	individual	soul	is	embodied	since	time	immemorial.	It	is	very
difficult	for	him	to	simply	theoretically	understand	that	he	is	not	the	body.
Therefore,	the	
bhakti-yogī	
accepts	the	Deity	of	Kṛṣṇa	as	worshipable	becausethere	is	some	bodily	conception	fixed	in	the	mind,	which	can	thus	be	applied.
Of	course,	worship	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	in	His	form	within
the	temple	is	not	idol	worship.	There	is	evidence	in	the	Vedic	literature	that
worship	may	be	
saguṇa	
and	
nirguṇa
—of	the	Supreme	possessing	or	not
possessing	attributes.	Worship	of	the	Deity	in	the	temple	is	
saguṇa	
worship,
for	the	Lord	is	represented	by	material	qualities.	But	the	form	of	the	Lord,
though	represented	by	material	qualities	such	as	stone,	wood,	or	oil	paint,	is
not	actually	material.	That	is	the	absolute	nature	of	the	Supreme	Lord.
A	crude	example	may	be	given	here.	We	may	find	some	mailboxes	on	the
street,	and	if	we	post	our	letters	in	those	boxes,	they	will	naturally	go	to	their
destination	without	difficulty.	But	any	old	box,	or	an	imitation,	which	we	may
find	somewhere,	which	is	not	authorized	by	the	post	office,	will	not	do	the
work.	Similarly,	God	has	an	authorized	representation	in	the	Deity	form,
which	is	called	
arca-vigraha.	
This	
arca-vigraha	
is	an	incarnation	of	the
Supreme	Lord.	God	will	accept	service	through	that	form.	The	Lord	is
omnipotent	and	all-powerful;	therefore,	by	His	incarnation	as	
arca-vigraha,
He	can	accept	the	services	of	the	devotee,	just	to	make	it	convenient	for	the
man	in	conditioned	life.
So,	for	a	devotee,	there	is	no	difficulty	in	approaching	the	Supreme
immediately	and	directly,	but	for	those	who	are	following	the	impersonal	way
to	spiritual	realization,	the	path	is	difficult.	They	have	to	understand	the
unmanifested	representation	of	the	Supreme	through	such	Vedic	literatures	as
the	
Upaniṣads,	
and	they	have	to	learn	the	language,	understand	the
nonperceptual	feelings,	and	they	have	to	realize	all	these	processes.	This	is	not
very	easy	for	a	common	man.	A	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	engaged	in
devotional	service,	simply	by	the	guidance	of	the	bona	fide	spiritual	master,
simply	by	offering	regulative	obeisances	unto	the	Deity,	simply	by	hearing	the
glories	of	the	Lord,	and	simply	by	eating	the	remnants	of	foodstuffs	offered	to
the	Lord,	realizes	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	very	easily.	There	is	no
doubt	that	the	impersonalists	are	unnecessarily	taking	a	troublesome	path	with
the	risk	of	not	realizing	the	Absolute	Truth	at	the	ultimate	end.	But	the
personalist,	without	any	risk,	trouble,	or	difficulty,	approaches	the	Supreme
Personality	directly.	A	similar	passage	appears	in	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.	
It	is
stated	there	that	if	one	has	to	ultimately	surrender	unto	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead	(This	surrendering	process	is	called	
bhakti.
),	but
instead	takes	the	trouble	to	understand	what	is	Brahman	and	what	is	not
Brahman	and	spends	his	whole	life	in	that	way,	the	result	is	simply
troublesome.	Therefore	it	is	advised	here	that	one	should	not	take	up	thistroublesome	path	of	self-realization	because	there	is	uncertainty	in	the
ultimate	result.
A	living	entity	is	eternally	an	individual	soul,	and	if	he	wants	to	merge	into
the	spiritual	whole,	he	may	accomplish	the	realization	of	the	eternal	and
knowledgeable	aspects	of	his	original	nature,	but	the	blissful	portion	is	not
realized.	By	the	grace	of	some	devotee,	such	a	transcendentalist,	highly
learned	in	the	process	of	
jñāna-yoga,	
may	come	to	the	point	of	
bhakti-yoga,	
or
devotional	service.	At	that	time,	long	practice	in	impersonalism	also	becomes
a	source	of	trouble,	because	he	cannot	give	up	the	idea.	Therefore	an
embodied	soul	is	always	in	difficulty	with	the	unmanifest,	both	at	the	time	of
practice	and	at	the	time	of	realization.	Every	living	soul	is	partially
independent,	and	one	should	know	for	certain	that	this	unmanifested
realization	is	against	the	nature	of	his	spiritual	blissful	self.	One	should	not
take	up	this	process.	For	every	individual	living	entity	the	process	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	which	entails	full	engagement	in	devotional	service,	is	the	best
way.	If	one	wants	to	ignore	this	devotional	service,	there	is	the	danger	of
turning	to	atheism.	Thus	this	process	of	centering	attention	on	the
unmanifested,	the	inconceivable,	which	is	beyond	the	approach	of	the	senses,
as	already	expressed	in	this	verse,	should	never	be	encouraged	at	any	time,
especially	in	this	age.	It	is	not	advised	by	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXTS	6-7
य े
	
त ु
	
स व ा ᆼ ि ण
	
क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
म ि य
	
स ं ᇳ य ᇿ य
	
म ᇰ प र ः
	
।
अ न ᇳ य े न ै व
	
य ो ग े न
	
म ा ं
	
ᇲ य ा य ᇳ त
	
उ प ा स त े
	
॥
६
॥
त े ष ा म ह ं
	
स म ु ሬ त ा ᆼ
	
म ृ ᇰ य ु स ं स ा र स ा ग र ा त ्
	
।
भ व ा ि म
	
न
	
ि च र ा ᇰ प ा थ ᆼ
	
म ᇹ य ा व े ि श त च े त स ा म ्
	
॥
७
॥
ye	tu	sarvāṇi	karmāṇi
mayi	sannyasya	mat-parāḥ
ananyenaiva	yogena
māṁ	dhyāyanta	upāsate
teṣām	ahaṁ	samuddhartā
mṛtyu-saṁsāra-sāgarāt
bhavāmi	na	cirāt	pārtha
mayy	āveśita-cetasāmye—
one	who;	
tu—
but;	
sarvāṇi—
everything;	
karmāṇi—
activities;	
mayi—
unto	Me;	
sannyasya—
giving	up;	
mat-parāḥ—
being	attached	to	Me;	
ananyena
—
without	division;	
eva—
certainly;	
yogena
—by	practice	of	such	
bhakti-yoga;
mām—
unto	Me;	
dhyāyantaḥ—
meditating;	
upāsate—
worship;	
teṣām—
of	them;
aham—
I;
	samuddhartā—
deliverer;	
mṛtyu
—that;	
saṁsāra—
material	existence;
sāgarāt
—from	the	ocean;	
bhavāmi—
become;	
na	cirāt
—not	a	long	time;
pārtha—
O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
mayi—
unto	Me;	
āveśita—
fixed;	
cetasām—
of	those
whose	minds	are	like	that.
TRANSLATION
For	one	who	worships	Me,	giving	up	all	his	activities	unto	Me	and
being	devoted	to	Me	without	deviation,	engaged	in	devotional	service	and
always	meditating	upon	Me,	who	has	fixed	his	mind	upon	Me,	O	son	of
Pṛthā,	for	him	I	am	the	swift	deliverer	from	the	ocean	of	birth	and	death.
PURPORT
It	is	explicitly	stated	here	that	the	devotees	are	very	fortunate	to	be
delivered	very	soon	from	material	existence	by	the	Lord.	In	pure	devotional
service	one	comes	to	the	realization	that	God	is	great	and	that	the	individual
soul	is	subordinate	to	Him.	His	duty	is	to	render	service	to	the	Lord—if	not,
then	he	will	render	service	to	
māyā
.
As	stated	before,	the	Supreme	Lord	can	only	be	appreciated	by	devotional
service.	Therefore,	one	should	be	fully	devoted.	One	should	fix	his	mind	fully
on	Kṛṣṇa	in	order	to	achieve	Him.	One	should	work	only	for	Kṛṣṇa.	It	does
not	matter	in	what	kind	of	work	one	engages,	but	that	work	should	be	done
only	for	Kṛṣṇa.	That	is	the	standard	of	devotional	service.	The	devotee	does
not	desire	any	achievement	other	than	pleasing	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.	His	life's	mission	is	to	please	Kṛṣṇa,	and	he	can	sacrifice	everything
for	Kṛṣṇa's	satisfaction,	just	as	Arjuna	did	in	the	Battle	of	Kurukṣetra.	The
process	is	very	simple:	one	can	devote	himself	in	his	occupation	and	engage	at
the	same	time	in	chanting	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/
Hare	Rāma,	Hare	Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,	Hare	Hare.	Such	transcendental
chanting	attracts	the	devotee	to	the	Personality	of	Godhead.
The	Supreme	Lord	herein	promises	that	He	will	without	delay	deliver	a
pure	devotee	thus	engaged	from	the	ocean	of	material	existence.	Those	whoare	advanced	in	
yoga	
practice	can	willfully	transfer	the	soul	to	whatever
planet	they	like	by	the	
yoga	
process,	and	others	take	the	opportunity	in	various
ways,	but	as	far	as	the	devotee	is	concerned,	it	is	clearly	stated	here	that	the
Lord	Himself	takes	him.	He	does	not	need	to	wait	to	become	very	experienced
in	order	to	transfer	himself	to	the	spiritual	sky.
In	the	
Varāha	Purāṇa	
this	verse	appears:
nayāmi	paramaṁ	sthānam	arcirādi-gatiṁ	vinā
garuḍa-skandham	āropya	yatheccham	anivāritaḥ
The	purport	of	this	verse	is	that	a	devotee	does	not	need	to	practice	
aṣṭāṅga-
yoga	
in	order	to	transfer	his	soul	to	the	spiritual	planets.	The	responsibility	is
taken	by	the	Supreme	Lord	Himself.	He	clearly	states	here	that	He	Himself
becomes	the	deliverer.	A	child	is	completely	cared	for	by	his	parents,	and	thus
his	position	is	secure.	Similarly,	a	devotee	does	not	need	to	endeavor	to
transfer	himself	by	
yoga	
practice	to	other	planets.	Rather,	the	Supreme	Lord,
by	His	great	mercy,	comes	at	once,	riding	on	His	bird	carrier	Garuḍa,	and	at
once	delivers	the	devotee	from	this	material	existence.	Although	a	man	who
has	fallen	in	the	ocean	may	struggle	very	hard	and	may	be	very	expert	in
swimming,	he	cannot	save	himself.	But	if	someone	comes	and	picks	him	up
from	the	water,	then	he	is	easily	rescued.	Similarly,	the	Lord	picks	up	the
devotee	from	this	material	existence.	One	simply	has	to	practice	the	easy
process	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	fully	engage	himself	in	devotional
service.	Any	intelligent	man	should	always	prefer	the	process	of	devotional
service	to	all	other	paths.	In	the	
Nārāyaṇīya	
this	is	confirmed	as	follows:
yā	vai	sādhana-sampatti-puruṣārtha-catuṣṭaye
tayā	vinā	tad-āpnoti	naro	nārāyaṇāśrayaḥ
The	purport	of	this	verse	is	that	one	should	not	engage	in	the	different
processes	of	fruitive	activity	or	cultivate	knowledge	by	the	mental	speculative
process.	One	who	is	devoted	to	the	Supreme	Personality	can	attain	all	the
benefits	derived	from	other	yogic	processes,	speculation,	rituals,	sacrifices,
charities,	etc.	That	is	the	specific	benediction	of	devotional	service.
Simply	by	chanting	the	holy	name	of	Kṛṣṇa—Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/	Hare	Rāma,	Hare	Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,	Hare	Hare—a
devotee	of	the	Lord	can	approach	the	supreme	destination	easily	and	happily,
but	this	destination	cannot	be	approached	by	any	other	process	of	religion.
The	conclusion	of	
Bhagavad-gītā	
is	stated	in	the	Eighteenth	Chapter:sarva-dharmān	parityajya	mām	ekaṁ	śaraṇaṁ	vraja
ahaṁ	tvāṁ	sarva-pāpebhyo	mokṣayiṣyāmi	mā	śucaḥ.
One	should	give	up	all	other	processes	of	self-realization	and	simply	execute
devotional	service	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	That	will	enable	one	to	reach	the
highest	perfection	of	life.	There	is	no	need	for	one	to	consider	the	sinful
actions	of	his	past	life	because	the	Supreme	Lord	fully	takes	charge	of	him.
Therefore	one	should	not	futilely	try	to	deliver	himself	in	spiritual	realization.
Let	everyone	take	shelter	of	the	supreme	omnipotent	Godhead	Kṛṣṇa.	That	is
the	highest	perfection	of	life.
TEXT	8
म ᇹ य े व
	
म न
	
आ ध ᇰ ᇿ व
	
म ि य
	
ब ु द ् ि ध ं
	
ि न व े श य
	
।
ि न व ि स ᇾ य ि स
	
म ᇹ य े व
	
अ त
	
ऊ ᇲ व ᆾ
	
न
	
स ं श य ः
	
॥
८
॥
mayy	eva	mana	ādhatsva
mayi	buddhiṁ	niveśaya
nivasiṣyasi	mayy	eva
ata	ūrdhvaṁ	na	saṁśayaḥ
mayi—
unto	Me;	
eva—
certainly;	
manaḥ—
mind;	
ādhatsva—
fix;	
mayi—	
upon
Me;	
buddhim—
intelligence;	
niveśaya—
apply;	
nivasiṣyasi—
you	lead;	
mayi
—
unto	Me;	
eva—
certainly;	
ataḥ—
therefore;	
ūrdhvam—
up;
	na—
never;
saṁśayaḥ—
doubt.
TRANSLATION
Just	fix	your	mind	upon	Me,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	and
engage	all	your	intelligence	in	Me.	Thus	you	will	live	in	Me	always,
without	a	doubt.
PURPORT
One	who	is	engaged	in	Lord	Kṛṣṇa's	devotional	service	lives	in	a	direct
relationship	with	the	Supreme	Lord,	so	there	is	no	doubt	that	his	position	is
transcendental	from	the	very	beginning.	A	devotee	does	not	live	on	thematerial	plane—he	lives	in	Kṛṣṇa.	The	holy	name	of	the	Lord	and	the	Lord	are
nondifferent;	therefore	when	a	devotee	chants	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	and	His
internal	potency	are	dancing	on	the	tongue	of	the	devotee.	When	he	offers
Kṛṣṇa	food,	Kṛṣṇa	directly	accepts	these	eatables,	and	the	devotee	becomes
Kṛṣṇa-ized	by	eating	the	remnants.	One	who	does	not	engage	in	such	service
cannot	understand	how	this	is	so,	although	this	is	a	process	recommended	in
the	
Gītā
	and	in	other	Vedic	literatures.
TEXT	9
अ थ
	
ि च ሧ ं
	
स म ा ध ा त ु ं
	
न
	
श ᇧ न ो ि ष
	
म ि य
	
ि ᇿ थ र म ्
	
।
अ ᇷ य ा स य ो ग े न
	
त त ो
	
म ा ि म ᇫ छ ा ᇴ त ु ं
	
ध न ᇮ ज य
	
॥
९
॥
atha	cittaṁ	samādhātuṁ
na	śaknoṣi	mayi	sthiram
abhyāsa-yogena	tato
mām	icchāptuṁ	dhanañjaya
atha—
if,	therefore;	
cittam—
mind;	
samādhātam—
fixing;	
na—
not;	
śaknoṣi
—
able;	
mayi—
upon	Me;	
sthiram—
fixed;	
abhyāsa—
practice;	
yogena
—by
devotional	service;	
tataḥ
—therefore;	
mām—
Me;	
icchā—
desire;	
āptum
—to
get;	
dhanañjaya
—O	Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
My	dear	Arjuna,	O	winner	of	wealth,	if	you	cannot	fix	your	mind	upon
Me	without	deviation,	then	follow	the	regulated	principles	of	bhakti-yoga.
In	this	way	you	will	develop	a	desire	to	attain	to	Me.
PURPORT
In	this	verse,	two	different	processes	of	
bhakti-yoga	
are	indicated.	The	first
applies	to	one	who	has	actually	developed	an	attachment	for	Kṛṣṇa,	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	by	transcendental	love.	And	the	other	is	for
one	who	has	not	developed	an	attachment	for	the	Supreme	Person	by
transcendental	love.	For	this	second	class	there	are	different	prescribed	rulesand	regulations,	which	one	can	follow	to	be	ultimately	elevated	to	the	stage	of
attachment	to	Kṛṣṇa.
Bhakti-yoga	
isthe	purification	of	the	senses.	At	the	present	moment	in
material	existence	the	senses	are	always	impure,	being	engaged	in	sense
gratification.	But,	by	the	practice	of	
bhakti-yoga	
these	senses	can	become
purified,	and	in	the	purified	state	they	come	directly	in	contact	with	the
Supreme	Lord.	In	this	material	existence,	I	may	be	engaged	in	some	service	to
some	master,	but	I	don't	really	lovingly	serve	my	master.	I	simply	serve	to	get
some	money.	And	the	master	also	is	not	in	love;	he	takes	service	from	me	and
pays	me.	So	there	is	no	question	of	love.	But	for	spiritual	life,	one	must	be
elevated	to	the	pure	stage	of	love.	That	stage	of	love	can	be	achieved	by
practice	of	devotional	service,	performed	with	the	present	senses.
This	love	of	God	is	now	in	a	dormant	state	in	everyone's	heart.	And,	there,
love	of	God	is	manifested	in	different	ways,	but	it	is	contaminated	by	the
material	association.	Now	the	material	association	has	to	be	purified,	and	that
dormant,	natural	love	for	Kṛṣṇa	has	to	be	revived.	That	is	the	whole	process.
To	practice	the	regulative	principles	of	
bhakti-yoga	
one	should,	under	the
guidance	of	an	expert	spiritual	master,	follow	certain	principles:	one	should
rise	early	in	the	morning,	take	bath,	enter	the	temple	and	offer	prayers	and
chant	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	then	collect	flowers	to	offer	to	the	Deity,	cook	foodstuffs	to
offer	to	the	Deity,	take	
prasādam,	
and	so	on.	There	are	various	rules	and
regulations	which	one	should	follow.	And	one	should	constantly	hear
Bhagavad-gītā	
and	
Śrīmad-	Bhāgavatam	
from	pure	devotees.	This	practice
can	help	anyone	to	rise	to	the	level	of	love	of	God,	and	then	he	is	sure	of	his
progress	into	the	spiritual	kingdom	of	God.	This	practice	of	
bhakti-yoga,
under	the	rules	and	regulations,	with	the	direction	of	a	spiritual	master,	will
surely	bring	one	to	the	stage	of	love	of	God.
TEXT	10
अ ᇷ य ा स े ऽ ᇴ य स म थ ो ᆼ ऽ ि स
	
म ᇰ क म ᆼ प र म ो
	
भ व
	
।
म द थ ᆼ म ि प
	
क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
क ु व ᆼ ि ᇳ स द ् ि ध म व ा ᇴ ᇿ य ि स
	
॥
१ ०
॥
abhyāse	'py	asamartho	'si
mat-karma-paramo	bhava
mad-artham	api	karmāṇikurvan	siddhim	avāpsyasi
abhyāse—
in	the	practice	of;	
api—
even;	
asamarthaḥ—
unable;	
asi
—you	are;
mat-karma—
My	work;	
paramaḥ—
supreme;	
bhava—
you	become;	
mat-
artham—
for	My	sake;	
api—
even	though;	
karmāṇi—
what;	
kurvan
—
performing;	
siddhim—
perfection;	
avāpsyasi—
achieve.
TRANSLATION
If	you	cannot	practice	the	regulations	of	bhakti-yoga,	then	just	try	to
work	for	Me,	because	by	working	for	Me	you	will	come	to	the	perfect
stage.
PURPORT
One	who	is	not	able	even	to	practice	the	regulative	principles	of	
bhakti-
yoga
,	under	the	guidance	of	a	spiritual	master,	can	still	be	drawn	to	this
perfectional	stage	by	working	for	the	Supreme	Lord.	How	to	do	this	work	has
already	been	explained	in	the	fifty-fifth	verse	of	the	Eleventh	Chapter.	One
should	be	sympathetic	to	the	propagation	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	There	are
many	devotees	who	are	engaged	in	the	propagation	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,
and	they	require	help.	So,	even	if	one	cannot	directly	practice	the	regulated
principles	of	
bhakti-yoga,	
he	can	try	to	help	such	work.	Every	endeavor
requires	land,	capital,	organization,	and	labor.	Just	as,	in	business,	one	requires
a	place	to	stay,	some	capital	to	use,	some	labor,	and	some	organization	to
expand,	so	the	same	is	required	in	the	service	of	Kṛṣṇa.	The	only	difference	is
that	in	materialism	one	works	for	sense	gratification.	The	same	work,
however,	can	be	performed	for	the	satisfaction	of	Kṛṣṇa,	and	that	is	spiritual
activity.	If	one	has	sufficient	money,	he	can	help	in	building	an	office	or
temple	for	propagating	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Or	he	can	help	with	publications.
There	are	various	fields	of	activity,	and	one	should	be	interested	in	such
activities.	If	one	cannot	sacrifice	the	result	of	such	activities,	the	same	person
can	still	sacrifice	some	percentage	to	propagate	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	This
voluntary	service	to	the	cause	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	will	help	one	to	rise	to	a
higher	state	of	love	for	God,	whereupon	one	becomes	perfect.
TEXT	11अ थ ै त द ᇴ य श ᇧ त ो ऽ ि स
	
क त ु ᆾ
	
म ሱ ो ग म ा ि श ् र त ः
	
।
स व ᆼ क म ᆼ फ ल ᇰ य ा ग ं
	
त त ः
	
क ु ኄ
	
य त ा ᇰ म व ा न ्
	
॥
१ १
॥
athaitad	apy	aśakto	'si
kartuṁ	mad-yogam	āśritaḥ
sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ
tataḥ	kuru	yatātmavān
atha—
even	though;	
etat—
this;	
api—
also;	
aśaktaḥ—
unable;	
asi—
you	are;
kartum—
to	perform;	
mat—
unto	Me;	
yogam—
devotional	service;	
āśritaḥ—
refuge;	
sarva-karma—
all	activities;	
phala—
result;	
tyāgam—
for	renunciation;
tataḥ—
therefore;	
kuru—
do;	
yata-ātmavan—
self-situated.
TRANSLATION
If,	however,	you	are	unable	to	work	in	this	consciousness,	then	try	to
act	giving	up	all	results	of	your	work	and	try	to	be	self-situated.
PURPORT
It	may	be	that	one	is	unable	to	even	sympathize	with	the	activities	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	because	of	social,	familial	or	religious	considerations	or
because	of	some	other	impediments.	If	one	attaches	himself	directly	to	the
activities	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	there	may	be	objection	from	family
members,	or	so	many	other	difficulties.	For	one	who	has	such	a	problem,	it	is
advised	that	he	sacrifice	the	accumulated	result	of	his	activities	to	some	good
cause.	Such	procedures	are	described	in	the	Vedic	rules.	There	are	many
descriptions	of	sacrifices	and	special	functions	of	the	
pumundi,	
or	special
work	in	which	the	result	of	one's	previous	action	may	be	applied.	Thus	one
may	gradually	become	elevated	to	the	state	of	knowledge.	It	is	also	found	that
when	one	who	is	not	even	interested	in	the	activities	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness
gives	charity	to	some	hospital	or	some	other	social	institution,	he	gives	up	the
hard-earned	results	of	his	activities.	That	is	also	recommended	here	because
by	the	practice	of	giving	up	the	fruits	of	one's	activities	one	is	sure	to	purify
his	mind	gradually,	and	in	that	purified	stage	of	mind	one	becomes	able	to
understand	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Of	course	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	not
dependent	on	any	other	experience	because	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	itself	canpurify	one's	mind,	but	if	there	are	impediments	to	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	one
may	try	to	give	up	the	result	of	his	action.	In	that	respect,	social	service,
community	service,	national	service,	sacrifice	for	one's	country,	etc.,	may	be
accepted	so	that	some	day	one	may	come	to	the	stage	of	pure	devotional
service	to	the	Supreme	Lord.	In	
Bhagavad-gītā	
we	find	it	is	stated:	
yataḥ
pravṛttir	bhūtānām:	
If	one	decides	to	sacrifice	for	the	supreme	cause,	even	if
he	does	not	know	that	the	supreme	cause	is	Kṛṣṇa,	he	will	come	gradually	to
understand	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	supreme	cause	by	the	sacrificial	method.
TEXT	12
श ् र े य ो
	
ि ह
	
ᇥ ा न म ᇷ य ा स ा ᇬ ᇥ ा न ा ሬ ᆸ ा न ं
	
ि व ि श ᇾ य त े
	
।
ᇲ य ा न ा ᇰ क म ᆼ फ ल ᇰ य ा ग ᇿ ᇰ य ा ग ा ᇫ छ ा ि ᇳ त र न ᇳ त र म ्
	
॥
१ २
॥
śreyo	hi	jñānam	abhyāsāj
jñānād	dhyānaṁ	viśiṣyate
dhyānāt	karma-phala-tyāgas
tyāgāc	chāntir	anantaram
śreyaḥ—
better;	
hi—
certainly;	
jñānam—
knowledge;	
abhyāsāt—
by	practice;
jnānāt—
better	than	knowledge;	
dhyānam—
meditation;	
viśiṣyate—
especially
considered;	
dhyānāt—
from	meditation;	
karma-phala-tyāgaḥ—
renunciation	of
the	results	of	fruitive	action;	
tyāgāt—
by	such	renunciation;	
śāntiḥ—
peace;
anantaram—
thereafter.
TRANSLATION
If	you	cannot	take	to	this	practice,	then	engage	yourself	in	the
cultivation	of	knowledge.	Better	than	knowledge,	however,	is	meditation,
and	better	than	meditation	is	renunciation	of	the	fruits	of	action,	for	by
such	renunciation	one	can	attain	peace	of	mind.
PURPORT
As	mentioned	in	the	previous	verses,	there	are	two	kinds	of	devotional
service:	the	way	of	regulated	principles,	and	the	way	of	full	attachment	in	loveto	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	For	those	who	are	actually	not	able	to
follow	the	principles	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	it	is	better	to	cultivate
knowledge	because	by	knowledge	one	can	be	able	to	understand	his	real
position.	Gradually	knowledge	will	develop	to	the	point	of	meditation.	By
meditation	one	can	be	able	to	understand	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead
by	a	gradual	process.	There	are	processes	which	make	one	understand	that	one
himself	is	the	Supreme,	and	that	sort	of	meditation	is	preferred	if	one	is	unable
to	engage	in	devotional	service.	If	one	is	not	able	to	meditate	in	such	a	way,
then	there	are	prescribed	duties,	as	enjoined	in	the	Vedic	literature,	for	the
brāhmaṇas,	vaiśyas,	
and	
śūdras,	
which	we	shall	find	in	a	later	chapter	of
Bhagavad-gītā.	
But	in	all	cases,	one	should	give	up	the	result	or	fruits	of
labor;	this	means	to	employ	the	result	of	
karma	
for	some	good	cause.	In
summary,	to	reach	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	the	highest	goal,
there	are	two	processes:	one	process	is	by	gradual	development,	and	the	other
process	is	direct.	Devotional	service	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	the	direct
method,	and	the	other	method	involves	renouncing	the	fruits	of	one's
activities.	Then	one	can	come	to	the	stage	of	knowledge,	then	to	the	stage	of
meditation,	then	to	the	stage	of	understanding	the	Supersoul,	and	then	to	the
stage	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	One	may	either	take	the	step	by
step	process	or	the	direct	path.	The	direct	process	is	not	possible	for	everyone;
therefore	the	indirect	process	is	also	good.	It	is,	however,	to	be	understood	that
the	indirect	process	is	not	recommended	for	Arjuna	because	he	is	already	at
the	stage	of	loving	devotional	service	to	the	Supreme	Lord.	It	is	for	others
who	are	not	at	this	state;	for	them	the	gradual	process	of	renunciation,
knowledge,	meditation	and	realization	of	the	Supersoul	and	Brahman	should
be	followed.	But	as	far	as	
Bhagavad-gītā	
is	concerned,	it	is	the	direct	method
that	is	stressed.	Everyone	is	advised	to	take	to	the	direct	method	and	surrender
unto	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXTS	13-14
अ ሲ े ᇾ ट ा
	
स व ᆼ भ ू त ा न ा ं
	
म ै त ् र ः
	
क ኄ ण
	
ए व
	
च
	
।
ि न म ᆼ म ो
	
ि न र ह ङ ् क ा र ः
	
स म द ु ः ख स ु ख ः
	
ᇤ म ी
	
॥
१ ३
॥
स ᇳ त ु ᇾ ट ः
	
स त त ं
	
य ो ग ी
	
य त ा ᇰ म ा
	
द ृ ढ ि न ᇽ च य ः
	
।
म ᇹ य ि प ᆼ त म न ो ब ु द ् ि ध य ो ᆼ
	
म द ् भ ᇧ त ः
	
स
	
म े
	
ि प ् र य ः
	
॥
१ ४
॥
adveṣṭā	sarva-bhūtānāṁ
maitraḥ	karuṇa	eva	canirmamo	nirahaṅkāraḥ
sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ	kṣamī
santuṣṭaḥ	satataṁ	yogī
yatātmā	dṛḍha-niścayaḥ
mayy-arpita-mano-buddhir
yo	mad-bhaktaḥ	sa	me	priyaḥ
adveṣṭā—
not	envious;	
sarva-bhūtānām—
for	all	living	entities;	
maitraḥ—
friendly;	
karuṇaḥ—
kindly;	
eva—
certainly;	
ca—
also;	
nirmamaḥ—
with	no
sense	of	proprietorship;	
nirahaṅkāraḥ—
without	false	ego;	
sama—
equally;
duḥkhaḥ—
distress;	
sukhaḥ—
happiness;	
kṣamī—
forgiving;	
santuṣṭaḥ
—
satisfied;	
satatam—
satisfied;	
yogī
—engaged	in	devotion;	
yatā-atmā
—
endeavoring;	
dṛdḥaniścayaḥ—
with	determination;	
mayi—
upon	Me;	
arpita
—
engaged;	
manaḥ—
mind;	
buddhiḥ
—intelligent;	
yaḥ
—one	who;	
mat-bhaktaḥ
—
My	devotee;	
saḥ	me	priyaḥ—
he	is	dear	to	Me.
TRANSLATION
One	who	is	not	envious	but	who	is	a	kind	friend	to	all	living	entities,
who	does	not	think	himself	a	proprietor,	who	is	free	from	false	ego	and
equal	both	in	happiness	and	distress,	who	is	always	satisfied	and	engaged
in	devotional	service	with	determination	and	whose	mind	and	intelligence
are	in	agreement	with	Me—he	is	very	dear	to	Me.
PURPORT
Coming	again	to	the	point	of	pure	devotional	service,	the	Lord	is	describing
the	transcendental	qualifications	of	a	pure	devotee	in	these	two	verses.	A	pure
devotee	is	never	disturbed	in	any	circumstances.	Nor	is	he	envious	of	anyone.
Nor	does	a	devotee	become	his	enemy's	enemy;	he	thinks	that	one	is	acting	as
his	enemy	due	to	his	own	past	misdeeds.	Thus	it	is	better	to	suffer	than	to
protest.	In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
it	is	stated:	
tat	te	'nukampāṁ	su-
samīkṣyamaṇo.	
Whenever	a	devotee	is	in	distress	or	has	fallen	into	difficulty,
he	thinks	that	it	is	the	Lord's	mercy	upon	him.	He	thinks:	"Thanks	to	my	past
misdeeds	I	should	suffer	far,	far	greater	than	I	am	suffering	now.	So	it	is	by	the
mercy	of	the	Supreme	Lord	that	I	am	not	getting	all	the	punishment	I	am	due.
I	am	just	getting	a	little,	by	the	mercy	of	the	Supreme	Personality	ofGodhead."	Therefore	he	is	always	calm,	quiet	and	patient,	despite	many
distressful	conditions.	A	devotee	is	also	always	kind	to	everyone,	even	to	his
enemy.	
Nirmama	
means	that	a	devotee	does	not	attach	much	importance	to	the
peace	and	trouble	pertaining	to	the	body	because	he	knows	perfectly	well	that
he	is	not	the	material	body.	He	does	not	identify	with	the	body;	therefore	he	is
freed	from	the	conception	of	false	ego	and	is	equiposed	both	in	happiness	and
distress.	He	is	tolerant,	and	he	is	satisfied	with	whatever	comes	by	the	grace	of
the	Supreme	Lord.	He	does	not	endeavor	much	to	achieve	something	with
great	difficulty;	therefore	he	is	always	joyful.	He	is	a	completely	perfect
mystic	because	he	is	fixed	in	the	instructions	received	from	the	spiritual
master,	and	because	his	senses	are	controlled,	he	is	determined.	He	is	not
swayed	by	false	argument	because	no	one	can	lead	him	from	the	fixed
determination	of	devotional	service.	He	is	fully	conscious	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the
eternal	Lord,	so	no	one	can	disturb	him.	All	his	qualifications	enable	him	to
depend	entirely	on	the	Supreme	Lord.	Such	a	standard	of	devotional	service	is
undoubtably	very	rare,	but	a	devotee	becomes	situated	in	that	stage	by
following	the	regulative	principles	of	devotional	service.	Furthermore,	the
Lord	says	that	such	a	devotee	is	very	dear	to	Him,	for	the	Lord	is	always
pleased	with	all	his	activities	in	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
TEXT	15
य ᇿ म ा ᇳ न ो द ् ि व ज त े
	
ल ो क ो
	
ल ो क ा ᇳ न ो द ् ि व ज त े
	
च
	
य ः
	
।
ह ष ा ᆼ म ष ᆼ भ य ो ሲ े ग ै म ु ᆼ ᇧ त ो
	
य ः
	
स
	
च
	
म े
	
ि प ् र य ः
	
॥
१ ५
॥
yasmān	nodvijate	loko
lokān	nodvijate	ca	yaḥ
harṣāmarṣa-bhayodvegair
mukto	yaḥ	sa	ca	me	priyaḥ
yasmāt—
from	whom;	
na—
never;	
udvijate—
agītātes;	
lokaḥ—
persons;	
lokāt
—
persons;	
na—
never;	
advijate
—disturbed;	
ca
—also;	
yaḥ
—anyone;	
harṣa
—
happiness;	
amarṣa
—distress;	
bhaya—
fearfulness;	
udvegaiḥ—
with	anxiety;
muktaḥ
—freed;	
yaḥ
—who;	
saḥ
—anyone;	
ca—
also;	
me
—My;	
priyaḥ—
very
dear.
TRANSLATIONHe	for	whom	no	one	is	put	into	difficulty	and	who	is	not	dirturbed	by
anxiety,	who	is	steady	in	happiness	and	distress,	is	very	dear	to	Me.
PURPORT
A	few	of	a	devotee's	qualifications	are	further	being	described.	No	one	is
put	into	difficulty,	anxiety,	fearfulness,	or	dissatisfaction	by	such	a	devotee.
Since	a	devotee	is	kind	to	everyone,	he	does	not	act	in	such	a	way	to	put
others	into	anxiety.	At	the	same	time,	if	others	try	to	put	a	devotee	into
anxiety,	he	is	not	disturbed.	It	is	by	the	grace	of	the	Lord	that	he	is	so
practiced	that	he	is	not	disturbed	by	any	outward	disturbance.	Actually
because	a	devotee	is	always	engrossed	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	engaged	in
devotional	service,	all	such	material	circumstances	cannot	woo	him.	Generally
a	materialistic	person	becomes	very	happy	when	there	is	something	for	his
sense	gratification	and	his	body,	but	when	he	sees	that	others	have	something
for	their	sense	gratification	and	he	hasn't,	he	is	sorry	and	envious.	When	he	is
expecting	some	retaliation	from	an	enemy,	he	is	in	a	state	of	fear,	and	when	he
cannot	successfully	execute	something	he	becomes	dejected.	But	a	devotee	is
always	transcendental	to	all	these	disturbances;	therefore	he	is	very	dear	to
Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	16
अ न प े ᇤ ः
	
श ु ि च द ᆼ ᇤ
	
उ द ा स ी न ो
	
ग त ᇼ य थ ः
	
।
स व ा ᆼ र ᇸ भ प ि र ᇰ य ा ग ी
	
य ो
	
म द ् भ ᇧ त ः
	
स
	
म े
	
ि प ् र य ः
	
॥
१ ६
॥
anapekṣaḥ	śucir	dakṣa
udāsīno	gata-vyathaḥ
sarvārambha-parityāgī
yo	mad-bhaktaḥ	sa	me	priyaḥ
anapekṣaḥ—
neutral;	
śuciḥ—
pure;	
dakṣaḥ—
expert;	
udāsīnaḥ
—free	from
care;	
gata-vyathaḥ
—freed	from	all	distress;	
sarva-ārambha—
all	endeavors;
parityāgī
—renouncer;	
yaḥ
—anyone;	
mat-bhaktaḥ—
My	devotee;	
saḥ—
he;	
me
—Me;	
priyaḥ
—very	dearTRANSLATION
A	devotee	who	is	not	dependent	on	the	ordinary	course	of	activities,
who	is	pure,	expert,	without	cares,	free	from	all	pains,	and	who	does	not
strive	for	some	result,	is	very	dear	to	Me.
PURPORT
Money	may	be	offered	to	a	devotee,	but	he	should	not	struggle	to	acquire	it.
If	automatically,	by	the	grace	of	the	Supreme,	money	comes	to	him,	he	is	not
agitated.	Naturally	a	devotee	takes	bath	at	least	twice	in	a	day	and	rises	early
in	the	morning	for	devotional	service.	Thus	he	is	naturally	clean	both	inwardly
and	outwardly.	A	devotee	is	always	expert	because	he	fully	knows	the	sense	of
all	activities	of	life,	and	he	is	convinced	of	the	authoritative	scriptures.	A
devotee	never	takes	the	part	of	a	particular	party;	therefore	he	is	carefree.	He
is	never	pained	because	he	is	free	from	all	designations;	he	knows	that	his
body	is	a	designation,	so	if	there	are	some	bodily	pains,	he	is	free.	The	pure
devotee	does	not	endeavor	for	anything	which	is	against	the	principles	of
devotional	service.	For	example,	constructing	a	big	building	requires	great
energy,	and	a	devotee	does	not	take	to	such	business	if	it	does	not	benefit	him
by	advancing	his	devotional	service.	He	may	construct	a	temple	for	the	Lord,
and	for	that	he	may	take	all	kinds	of	anxiety,	but	he	does	not	construct	a	big
house	for	his	personal	relations.
TEXT	17
य ो
	
न
	
ᇦ ᇾ य ि त
	
न
	
ሲ े ि ᇾ ट
	
न
	
श ो च ि त
	
न
	
क ा ङ ् ᇤ ि त
	
।
श ु भ ा श ु भ प ि र ᇰ य ा ग ी
	
भ ि ᇧ त म ा ᇳ य ः
	
स
	
म े
	
ि प ् र य ः
	
॥
१ ७
॥
yo	na	hṛṣyati	na	dveṣṭi
na	śocati	na	kāṅkṣati
śubhāśubha-parityāgī
bhaktimān	yaḥ	sa	me	priyaḥ
yaḥ
—one	who:	
na—
never;	
hṛṣyati—
takes	pleasure;	
na—
never;	
dveṣṭi—grieves;	
na—
never;	
śocati—
laments;	
na—
never;	
kāṅkṣati—
desires;	
śubha—
auspicious;	
aśubha—
inauspicious;	
parityāgī—
renouncer;	
bhaktimān
—
devotee;	
yaḥ
—one	who;	
saḥ—
he	is;	
me—
My;
	priyaḥ—
dear.
TRANSLATION
One	who	neither	grasps	pleasure	or	grief,	who	neither	laments	nor
desires,	and	who	renounces	both	auspicious	and	inauspicious	things,	is
very	dear	to	Me.
PURPORT
A	pure	devotee	is	neither	happy	nor	distressed	over	material	gain	and	loss,
nor	is	he	very	much	anxious	to	get	a	son	or	disciple,	nor	is	he	distressed	by	not
getting	them.	If	he	loses	anything	which	is	very	dear	to	him,	he	does	not
lament.	Similarly,	if	he	does	not	get	what	he	desires,	he	is	not	distressed.	He	is
transcendental	in	the	face	of	all	kinds	of	auspicious,	inauspicious	and	sinful
activities.	He	is	prepared	to	accept	all	kinds	of	risks	for	the	satisfaction	of	the
Supreme	Lord.	Nothing	is	an	impediment	in	the	discharge	of	his	devotional
service.	Such	a	devotee	is	very	dear	to	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXTS	18-19
स म ः
	
श त ् र ौ
	
च
	
ि म त ् र े
	
च
	
त थ ा
	
म ा न ा प म ा न य ो ः
	
।
श ी त ो ᇾ ण स ु ख द ु ः ख े ष ु
	
स म ः
	
स ङ ् ग ि व व ि ज ᆼ त ः
	
॥
१ ८
॥
त ु ᇺ य ि न ᇳ द ा ᇿ त ु ि त म ौ ᆼ न ी
	
स ᇳ त ु ᇾ ट ो
	
य े न
	
क े न
	
ि च त ्
	
।
अ ि न क े त ः
	
ि ᇿ थ र म ि त भ ᆼ ि ᇧ त म ा ᇳ म े
	
ि प ् र य ो
	
न र ः
	
॥
१ ९
॥
samaḥ	śatrau	ca	mitre	ca
tathā	mānāpamānayoḥ
śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkheṣu
samaḥ	saṅga-vivarjitaḥ
tulya-nindā-stutir	maunī
santuṣṭo	yena	kenacit
aniketaḥ	sthira-matir
bhaktimān	me	priyo	naraḥsamaḥ—
equal;	
śatrau
—to	the	enemy;	
ca
—also;	
mitre
—to	friends;	
ca
—
also;	
tatha
—so;	
māna
—honor;	
apamānayoḥ—
dishonor;	
śīta
—cold;	
uṣṇa
—
heat;	
sukha—
happiness;	
duḥkheṣu—
distress;	
samaḥ—
equiposed;	
saṅga-
vivarjitaḥ—	
free	from	all	association;	
tulya
—equal;	
nindā
—defamation;	
stutiḥ
—
repute;	
maunī
—silent;	
santuṣṭaḥ
—satisfied;	
yena
—somehow;	
kena—
or
other;	
cit
—if;	
aniketaḥ—
having	no	residence;	
sthira—
fixed;	
matiḥ
—
determination;	
bhaktimān—
engaged	in	devotion;	
me
—My;	
priyaḥ
—dear;
naraḥ
—a	man.
TRANSLATION
One	who	is	equal	to	friends	and	enemies,	who	is	equiposed	in	honor
and	dishonor,	heat	and	cold,	happiness	and	distress,	fame	and	infamy,
who	is	always	free	from	contamination,	always	silent	and	satisfied	with
anything,	who	doesn't	care	for	any	residence,	who	is	fixed	in	knowledge
and	engaged	in	devotional	service,	is	very	dear	to	Me.
PURPORT
A	devotee	is	always	free	from	all	bad	association.	Sometimes	one	is	praised
and	sometimes	one	is	defamed;	that	is	the	nature	of	human	society.	But	a
devotee	is	always	transcendental	to	artificial	fame	and	infamy,	distress	or
happiness.	He	is	very	patient.	He	does	not	speak	of	anything	but	the	topics
about	Kṛṣṇa;	therefore	he	is	called	silent.	Silent	does	not	mean	that	one	should
not	speak;	silent	means	that	one	should	not	speak	nonsense.	One	should	speak
only	of	essentials,	and	the	most	essential	speech	for	the	devotee	is	to	speak	of
the	Supreme	Lord.	He	is	happy	in	all	conditions;	sometimes	he	may	get	very
palatable	foodstuffs,	sometimes	not,	but	he	is	satisfied.	Nor	does	he	care	for
any	residential	facility.	He	may	sometimes	live	underneath	a	tree,	and	he	may
sometimes	live	in	a	very	palatial	building;	he	is	attracted	to	neither.	He	is
called	fixed	because	he	is	fixed	in	his	determination	and	knowledge.	We	may
find	some	repetition	in	the	descriptions	of	the	qualifications	of	a	devotee,	but
this	is	just	to	give	an	illustration	of	the	fact	that	a	devotee	must	acquire	all
these	qualifications.	Without	good	qualifications,	one	cannot	be	a	pure
devotee.	One	who	is	not	a	devotee	has	no	good	qualification.	One	who	wants
to	be	recognized	as	a	devotee	should	develop	the	good	qualifications.	Of
course	he	does	not	extraneously	endeavor	to	acquire	these	qualifications,	butengagement	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	devotional	service	automatically
helps	him	develop	them.
TEXT	20
य े
	
त ु
	
ध ᇸ य ा ᆼ म ृ त ि म द ं
	
य थ ो ᇧ त ं
	
प य ु ᆼ प ा स त े
	
।
श ् र ራ ध ा न ा
	
म ᇰ प र म ा
	
भ ᇧ त ा ᇿ त े ऽ त ी व
	
म े
	
ि प ् र य ा ः
	
॥
२ ०
॥
ye	tu	dharmāmṛtam	idaṁ
yathoktaṁ	paryupāsate
śraddadhānā	mat-paramā
bhaktās	te	'tīva	me	priyāḥ
ye
—one	who;	
tu
—but;	
dharmya—
generosity;	
amṛtam
—understanding;
idam
—this;	
yathā
—as;	
uktam
—said;	
paryupāsate
—completely	engages;
sraddadhānāḥ—
with	faith;	
mat-paramāḥ
—taking	the	Supreme	Lord	as
everything;	
bhaktāḥ—
devotees;	
te
—such	persons;	
atīva
—very,	very;	
me
—
Me;	
priyāḥ—
dear.
TRANSLATION
He	who	follows	this	imperishable	path	of	devotional	service	and	who
completely	engages	himself	with	faith,	making	Me	the	supreme	goal,	is
very,	very	dear	to	Me.
PURPORT
In	this	chapter	the	religion	of	eternal	engagement,	the	explanation	of	the
process	of	transcendental	service	for	approaching	the	Supreme	Lord,	is	given.
This	process	is	very	dear	to	the	Lord,	and	He	accepts	a	person	who	is	engaged
in	such	a	process.	The	question	who	is	better—one	who	is	engaged	in	the	path
of	impersonal	Brahman	or	one	who	is	engaged	in	the	personal	service	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead—was	raised	by	Arjuna,	and	the	Lord	replied
to	him	so	explicitly	that	there	is	no	doubt	that	devotional	service	to	the
Personality	of	Godhead	is	the	best	of	all	processes	of	spiritual	realization.	In
other	words,	in	this	chapter	it	is	decided	that	through	good	association,	onedevelops	attachment	for	pure	devotional	service	and	thereby	accepts	a	bona
fide	spiritual	master	and	from	him	begins	to	hear	and	chant	and	observe	the
regulative	principles	of	devotional	service	with	faith,	attachment	and	devotion
and	thus	becomes	engaged	in	the	transcendental	service	of	the	Lord.	This	path
is	recommended	in	this	chapter;	therefore	there	is	no	doubt	that	devotional
service	is	the	only	absolute	path	for	self-realization,	for	the	attainment	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	The	impersonal	conception	of	the	Supreme
Absolute	Truth,	as	described	in	this	chapter,	is	recommended	only	up	to	the
time	one	surrenders	himself	for	self-realization.	In	other	words,	as	long	as	one
does	not	have	the	chance	to	associate	with	a	pure	devotee,	the	impersonal
conception	may	be	beneficial.	In	the	impersonal	conception	of	the	Absolute
Truth	one	works	without	fruitive	result,	meditates	and	cultivates	knowledge	to
understand	spirit	and	matter.	This	is	necessary	as	long	as	one	is	not	in	the
association	of	a	pure	devotee.	Fortunately,	if	one	develops	directly	a	desire	to
engage	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	in	pure	devotional	service,	he	does	not	need	to
undergo	step	by	step	improvements	in	spiritual	realization.	Devotional	service,
as	described	in	the	middle	six	chapters	of	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
is	more	congenial.
One	need	not	bother	about	materials	to	keep	body	and	soul	together	because
by	the	grace	of	the	Lord	everything	is	carried	out	automatically.
Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	Twelfth	Chapter	of	the	
Śrīmad-
Bhagavad-gītā
	in	the	matter	of	Devotional	Service.Chapter-13
CHAPTER	THIRTEEN
Nature,	the	Enjoyer,	and	Consciousness
TEXTS	1-2
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
प ् र क ृ ि त ं
	
प ु ኄ ष ं
	
च ै व
	
ᇤ े त ् र ं
	
ᇤ े त ् र ᇥ म े व
	
च
	
।
ए त ሲ े ि द त ु ि म ᇫ छ ा ि म
	
ᇥ ा न ं
	
ᇥ े य ं
	
च
	
क े श व
	
॥
१
॥
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
इ द ं
	
श र ी र ं
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
ᇤ े त ् र ि म ᇰ य ि भ ध ी य त े
	
।
ए त ሱ ो
	
व े ि ሧ
	
त ं
	
प ् र ा ह ु ः
	
ᇤ े त ् र ᇥ
	
इ ि त
	
त द ् ि व द ः
	
॥
२
॥
arjuna	uvācaprakṛtiṁ	puruṣaṁ	caiva
kṣetraṁ	kṣetrajñam	eva	ca
etad	veditum	icchāmi
jñānaṁ	jñeyaṁ	ca	keśava
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
idaṁ	śarīraṁ	kaunteya
kṣetram	ity	abhidhīyate
etad	yo	vetti	taṁ	prāhuḥ
kṣetrajñaḥ	iti	tad-vidaḥ
arjunaḥ	uvāca
—Arjuna	said;	
prakṛtim—
nature;	
puruṣam—
the	enjoyer;	
ca
—
also;	
eva—
certainly;	
kṣetram—
body;	
kṣetrajñam—
knower	of	the	body;	
eva
—
certainly;	
ca—
also;	
etat
—all	this;	
veditum—
to	understand;	
icchāmi—
I	wish;
jñānam
—knowledge;	
jñeyam—
the	object	of	knowledge;	
ca—
also;	
keśava
—O
Kṛṣṇa;	
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
idam—
this;
śarīram—
body;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of	Kuntī;	
kṣetram—
the	field;	
iti—
thus;
abhidhīyate—
iscalled;	
etat—
this;	
yaḥ
—anyone;	
vetti—
knows;	
tam	—
him;
prāhuḥ—
is	called;	
kṣetrajñaḥ—
knower	of	the	body;	
iti—
thus;	
tat-	vidaḥ—
one
who	knows.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	said:	O	my	dear	Kṛṣṇa,	I	wish	to	know	about	prakṛti	[nature],
Puruṣa	[the	enjoyer],	and	the	field	and	the	knower	of	the	field,	and	of
knowledge	and	the	end	of	knowledge.	The	Blessed	Lord	then	said:	This
body,	O	son	of	Kuntī,	is	called	the	field,	and	one	who	knows	this	body	is
called	the	knower	of	the	field.
PURPORT
Arjuna	was	inquisitive	about	
prakṛti	
or	nature,	
puruṣa,	
the	enjoyer,	
kṣetra,
the	field,	
kṣetrajña,	
its	knower,	and	of	knowledge	and	the	object	of
knowledge.	When	he	inquired	about	all	these,	Kṛṣṇa	said	that	this	body	is
called	the	field	and	that	one	who	knows	this	body	is	called	the	knower	of	the
field.	This	body	is	the	field	of	activity	for	the	conditioned	soul.	The
conditioned	soul	is	entrapped	in	material	existence,	and	he	attempts	to	lord
over	material	nature.	And	so,	according	to	his	capacity	to	dominate	materialnature,	he	gets	a	field	of	activity.	That	field	of	activity	is	the	body.	And	what	is
the	body?	The	body	is	made	of	senses.	The	conditioned	soul	wants	to	enjoy
sense	gratification,	and,	according	to	his	capacity	to	enjoy	sense	gratification,
he	is	offered	a	body,	or	field	of	activity.	Therefore	the	body	is	called	
kṣetra,	
or
the	field	of	activity	for	the	conditioned	soul.	Now,	the	person	who	does	not
identify	himself	with	the	body	is	called	
kṣetrajña,	
the	knower	of	the	field.	It	is
not	very	difficult	to	understand	the	difference	between	the	field	and	its
knower,	the	body	and	the	knower	of	the	body.	Any	person	can	consider	that
from	childhood	to	old	age	he	undergoes	so	many	changes	of	body	and	yet	is
still	one	person,	remaining.	Thus	there	is	a	difference	between	the	knower	of
the	field	of	activities	and	the	actual	field	of	activities.	A	living	conditioned
soul	can	thus	understand	that	he	is	different	from	the	body.	It	is	described	in
the	beginning
—dehe	
'smin—
that	the	living	entity	is	within	the	body	and	that
the	body	is	changing	from	childhood	to	boyhood	and	from	boyhood	to	youth
and	from	youth	to	old	age,	and	the	person	who	owns	the	body	knows	that	the
body	is	changing.	The	owner	is	distinctly	
kṣetrajña.	
Sometimes	we	understand
that	I	am	happy,	I	am	mad,	I	am	a	woman,	I	am	a	dog,	I	am	a	cat:	these	are	the
knowers.	The	knower	is	different	from	the	field.	Although	we	use	many
articles
—
our	clothes,	etc.
—
we	know	that	we	are	different	from	the	things
used.	Similarly,	we	also	understand	by	a	little	contemplation	that	we	are
different	from	the	body.
In	the	first	six	chapters	of	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
the	knower	of	the	body,	the	living
entity,	and	the	position	by	which	he	can	understand	the	Supreme	Lord	are
described.	In	the	middle	six	chapters	of	the	
Gītā,	
the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead	and	the	relationship	between	the	individual	soul	and	the	Supersoul	in
regard	to	devotional	service	are	described.	The	superior	position	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	and	the	subordinate	position	of	the
individual	soul	are	definitely	defined	in	these	chapters.	The	living	entities	are
subordinate	under	all	circumstances,	but	in	their	forgetfulness	they	are
suffering.	When	enlightened	by	pious	activities,	they	approach	the	Supreme
Lord	in	different	capacities–as	the	distressed,	those	in	want	of	money,	the
inquisitive,	and	those	in	search	of	knowledge.	That	is	also	described.	Now,
starting	with	the	Thirteenth	Chapter,	how	the	living	entity	comes	into	contact
with	material	nature,	how	he	is	delivered	by	the	Supreme	Lord	through	the
different	methods	of	fruitive	activities,	cultivation	of	knowledge,	and	the
discharge	of	devotional	service	are	explained.	Although	the	living	entity	is
completely	different	from	the	material	body,	he	somehow	becomes	related.
This	also	is	explained.TEXT	3
ᇤ े त ् र ᇥ ं
	
च ा ि प
	
म ा ं
	
ि व द ् ि ध
	
स व ᆼ ᇤ े त ् र े ष ु
	
भ ा र त
	
।
ᇤ े त ् र ᇤ े त ् र ᇥ य ो ᇥ ा ᆼ न ं
	
य ሧ ᇬ ᇥ ा न ं
	
म त ं
	
म म
	
॥
३
॥
kṣetrajñaṁ	cāpi	māṁ	viddhi
sarva-kṣetreṣu	bhārata
kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor	jñānaṁ
yat	taj	jñānaṁ	mataṁ	mama
kṣetrajñam—
the	knower;	
ca—
also;	
api—
certainly;	
mām—
Me;	
viddhi—
know;	
sarva—
all;	
kṣetreṣu—
in	bodily	fields;	
bhārata
—O	son	of	Bharata;
kṣetra—
field	of	activities	(the	body);	
kṣetrajñayoḥ—
the	knower	of	the	field;
jñānam—
knowledge;	
yat—
that	which	is	taught;	
tat—
that;	
jñānam—
knowledge;	
matam—
opinion;	
mama—
that.
TRANSLATION
O	scion	of	Bharata,	you	should	understand	that	I	am	also	the	knower
in	all	bodies,	and	to	understand	this	body	and	its	owner	is	called
knowledge.	That	is	My	opinion.
PURPORT
While	discussing	the	subject	of	this	body	and	the	owner	of	the	body,	the
soul	and	the	Supersoul,	we	shall	find	three	different	topics	of	study:	the	Lord,
the	living	entity,	and	matter.	In	every	field	of	activities,	in	every	body,	there
are	two	souls:	the	individual	soul	and	the	Supersoul.	Because	the	Supersoul	is
the	plenary	expansion	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa
says,	"I	am	also	the	knower,	but	I	am	not	the	individual	owner	of	the	body.	I
am	the	superknower.	I	am	present	in	every	body	as	the	Paramātmā,	or
Supersoul."
One	who	studies	the	subject	matter	of	the	field	of	activity	and	the	knower	of
the	field	very	minutely,	in	terms	of	this	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
can	attain	to
knowledge.
The	Lord	says:	"I	am	the	knower	of	the	field	of	activities	in	everyindividual	body."	The	individual	may	be	the	knower	of	his	own	body,	but	he	is
not	in	knowledge	of	other	bodies.	The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	who
is	present	as	the	Supersoul	in	all	bodies,	knows	everything	about	all	bodies.
He	knows	all	the	different	bodies	of	all	the	various	species	of	life.	A	citizen
may	know	everything	about	his	patch	of	land,	but	the	king	knows	not	only	his
palace	but	all	the	properties	possessed	by	the	individual	citizens.	Similarly,
one	may	be	the	proprietor	of	the	body	individually,	but	the	Supreme	Lord	is
the	proprietor	of	all	bodies.	The	king	is	the	original	proprietor	of	the	kingdom,
and	the	citizen	is	the	secondary	proprietor.	Similarly,	the	Supreme	Lord	is	the
supreme	proprietor	of	all	bodies.
The	body	consists	of	the	senses.	The	Supreme	Lord	is	Hṛṣīkeśa,	which
means	controller	of	the	senses.	He	is	the	original	controller	of	the	senses,	just
as	the	king	is	the	original	controller	of	all	the	activities	of	the	state,	and	the
citizens	are	secondary	controllers.	The	Lord	also	says:	"I	am	also	the	knower."
This	means	that	He	is	the	superknower;	the	individual	soul	knows	only	his
particular	body.	In	the	Vedic	literature,	it	is	stated	as	follows:
kṣetrāṇi	hi	śarīrāṇi	bījaṁ	cāpi	śubhāśubhe
tāni	vetti	sa	yogātmā	tataḥ	kṣetrajña	ucyate.
This	body	is	called	the	
kṣetra,	
and	within	it	dwells	the	owner	of	the	body	and
the	Supreme	Lord	who	knows	both	the	body	and	the	owner	of	the	body.
Therefore	He	is	called	the	knower	of	all	fields.	The	distinction	between	the
field	of	activities,	the	owner	of	activities	and	the	supreme	owner	of	activities
is	described	as	follows.	Perfect	knowledge	of	the	constitution	of	the	body,	the
constitution	of	the	individual	soul,	and	the	constitution	of	the	Supersoul	is
known	in	terms	of	Vedic	literature	as	
jñānam.	
That	is	the	opinion	of	Kṛṣṇa.	To
understand	both	the	soul	and	the	Supersoul	as	one	yet	distinct	is	knowledge.
One	who	does	not	understand	the	field	of	activity	and	the	knower	of	activity	is
not	in	perfect	knowledge.	One	has	to	understand	the	position	of	
prakṛti,
nature,	and	
puruṣa,	
the	enjoyer	of	the	nature,	and	
īśvara,	
the	knower	who
dominates	or	controls	nature	and	the	individual	soul.	One	should	not	confuse
the	three	in	their	different	capacities.	One	should	not	confuse	the	painter,	the
painting	and	the	easel.	This	material	world,	which	is	the	field	of	activities,	is
nature,	and	the	enjoyer	of	nature	is	the	living	entity,	and	above	them	both	is
the	supreme	controller,	the	Personality	of	Godhead.	It	is	stated	in	the	Vedic
language:	
"bhoktā	bhogyaṁ	preritāraṁ	ca	matvā	sarvaṁ	proktaṁ	tri-	vidhaṁ
brahmam	etat."	
There	are	three	Brahman	conceptions:	
prakṛti	
is	Brahman	as
the	field	of	activities,	and	the	
jīva	
(individual	soul)	is	also	Brahman	and	istrying	to	control	material	nature,	and	the	controller	of	both	of	them	is	also
Brahman,	but	He	is	the	factual	controller.
In	this	chapter	it	will	be	also	explained	that	out	of	the	two	knowers,	one	is
fallible	and	the	other	is	infallible.	One	is	superior	and	the	other	is	subordinate.
One	who	understands	the	two	knowers	of	the	field	to	be	one	and	the	same
contradicts	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	who	states	here	very	clearly
that	"I	am	also	the	knower	of	the	field	of	activity."	One	who	misunderstands	a
rope	to	be	a	serpent	is	not	in	knowledge.	There	are	different	kinds	of	bodies,
and	there	are	different	owners	of	the	bodies.	Because	each	individual	soul	has
his	individual	capacity	of	lording	it	over	material	nature,	there	are	different
bodies.	But	the	Supreme	also	is	present	in	them	as	the	controller.	The	word	
ca
is	significant,	for	it	indicates	the	total	number	of	bodies.	That	is	the	opinion	of
Śrīla	Baladeva	Vidyābhūṣaṇa:	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supersoul	present	in	each	and
every	body	apart	from	the	individual	soul.	And	Kṛṣṇa	explicitly	says	here	that
the	Supersoul	is	the	controller	of	both	the	field	of	activities	and	the	finite
enjoyer.
TEXT	4
त ᇰ ᇤ े त ् र ं
	
य ᇫ च
	
य ा द ृ ᇧ च
	
य द ् ि व क ा ि र
	
य त ᇽ च
	
य त ्
	
।
स
	
च
	
य ो
	
य ᇰ प ् र भ ा व ᇽ च
	
त ᇰ स म ा स े न
	
म े
	
श ृ ण ु
	
॥
४
॥
tat	kṣetraṁ	yac	ca	yādṛk	ca
yad	vikāri	yataś	ca	yat
sa	ca	yo	yat	prabhāvaś	ca
tat	samāsena	me	śṛṇu
tat
—that;	
kṣetram—
field	of	activities;	
yat
—as;	
ca
—also;	
yādṛk—
as	it	is;	
ca
—also;	
yat—
what	is;	
vikāri—
changes;	
yataḥ
—from	which;	
ca
—also;	
yat
—
one;	
saḥ
—he;	
ca—
also;	
yaḥ
—one;	
yat
—which;	
prabhāvaḥ
	
ca
—influence
also;	
tat
—that;	
samāsena—
in	detail;	
me
—from	Me;	
śṛṇu
—understand.
TRANSLATION
Now	please	hear	My	brief	description	of	this	field	of	activity	and	how	it
is	constituted,	what	its	changes	are,	whence	it	is	produced,	who	that
knower	of	the	field	of	activities	is,	and	what	his	influences	are.PURPORT
The	Lord	is	describing	the	field	of	activities	and	the	knower	of	the	field	of
activities	in	their	constitutional	positions.	One	has	to	know	how	this	body	is
constituted,	the	materials	of	which	this	body	is	made,	under	whose	control	this
body	is	working,	how	the	changes	are	taking	place,	wherefrom	the	changes
are	coming,	what	the	causes	are,	what	the	reasons	are,	what	the	ultimate	goal
of	the	individual	is,	and	what	the	actual	form	of	the	individual	soul	is.	One
should	also	know	the	distinction	between	the	individual	living	soul	and	the
Supersoul,	the	different	influences,	their	potentials,	etc.	One	just	has	to
understand	this	
Bhagavad-gītā	
directly	from	the	description	given	by	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	and	all	this	will	be	clarified.	But	one	should
be	careful	not	to	consider	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	in	every	body
and	individual	soul	to	be	the	
jīva.	
This	is	something	like	equalizing	the	potent
and	the	impotent.
TEXT	5
ऋ ि ष ि भ ब ᆼ ह ु ध ा
	
ग ी त ं
	
छ ᇳ द ो ि भ ि व ᆼ ि व ध ै ः
	
प ृ थ क ्
	
।
ब ् र ቊ स ू त ् र प द ै ᇽ च ै व
	
ह े त ु म द ् ि भ ि व ᆼ ि न ि ᇽ च त ै ः
	
॥
५
॥
ṛṣibhir	bahudhā	gītaṁ
chandobhir	vividhaih	pṛthak
brahma-sūtra-padaiś	caiva
hetumadbhir	viniścitaiḥ
ṛṣibhiḥ—
by	the	wise	sages;	
bahudhā—
in	many	ways;	
gītām—
described;	
chandobhiḥ
—
Vedic	hymns;	
vividhaiḥ—
in	various;	
pṛthak—
variously;	
brahma-	sūtra—
the	Vedānta;
padaiḥ—
aphorism;	
ca—
also;	
eva—
certainly;	
hetumadbhiḥ	—
with	cause	and	effect;
viniścitaiḥ—
ascertain.
TRANSLATION
That	knowledge	of	the	field	of	activities	and	of	the	knower	of	activities
is	described	by	various	sages	in	various	Vedic	writings—especially	in	the
Vedānta-sūtra—and	is	presented	with	all	reasoning	as	to	cause	and	effect.PURPORT
The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	is	the	highest	authority	in
explaining	this	knowledge.	Still,	as	a	matter	of	course,	learned	scholars	and
standard	authorities	always	give	evidence	from	previous	authorities.	Kṛṣṇa	is
explaining	this	most	controversial	point	regarding	the	duality	and	non-duality
of	the	soul	and	the	Supersoul	by	referring	to	Scriptures,	the	
Vedānta,	
which
are	accepted	as	authority.	First,	He	says,	this	is	according	to	different	sages.
As	far	as	the	sages	are	concerned,	besides	Himself,	Vyāsadeva,	the	author	of
the	
Vedānta-sūtra,	
is	a	great	sage,	and	in	the	
Vedānta-sūtra	
duality	is	perfectly
explained.	And	Vyāsadeva's	father,	Parāśara,	was	also	a	great	sage,	and	he
writes	in	his	books	of	religiosity:	"
aham	tvaṁ	ca	athānye...
"	"We
—
you,	I	and
various	other	living	entities
—
are	all	transcendental,	although	in	material
bodies.	Now	we	are	fallen	into	the	ways	of	the	three	modes	of	material	nature
according	to	our	different	
karma.
	As	such,	some	are	on	higher	levels,	and
some	are	in	the	lower	nature.	The	higher	and	lower	natures	exist	due	to
ignorance	and	are	being	manifested	in	an	infinite	number	of	living	entities.
But	the	Supersoul,	which	is	infallible,	is	uncontaminated	by	the	three	qualities
of	nature	and	is	transcendental."	Similarly,	in	the	original	
Vedas,	
a	distinction
between	the	soul,	the	Supersoul	and	the	body	is	made,	especially	in	the	
Kaṭha
Upaniṣad.
There	is	a	manifestation	of	the	Supreme	Lord's	energy	known	as	
annamaya
by	which	one	depends	simply	upon	food	for	existence.	This	is	a	materialistic
realization	of	the	Supreme.	Then	there	is	
prāṇamaya;	
this	means	that	after
realizing	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth	in	foodstuff,	one	can	realize	the
Absolute	Truth	in	the	living	symptoms,	or	life	forms.	In	
jñānamaya	
the	living
symptom	develops	to	the	point	of	thinking,	feeling,	and	willing.	Then	there	is
Brahman	realization	and	the	realization	called	
vijñānamaya
	by	which	the
living	entity's	mind	and	life	symptoms	are	distinguished	from	the	living	entity
himself.	The	next	and	supreme	stage	is	
ānandamaya,	
realization	of	the	all-
blissful	nature.	Thus	there	are	five	stages	of	Brahman	realization,	which	is
called	
brahma	puccham.	
Out	of	these	the	first	three
—annamaya,	prāṇamaya,
and	
jñānamaya—
involve	the	fields	of	activities	of	the	living	entities.
Transcendental	to	all	these	fields	of	activities	is	the	Supreme	Lord,	who	is
called	
ānandamaya.	
In	the	
Vedānta-	sūtra	
also	the	Supreme	is	called
ānandamayo	'bhyāsāt.	
The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is	by	nature	fullof	joy,	and	to	enjoy	His	transcendental	bliss,	He	expands	into	
vijñānamaya,
prāṇamaya,	jñānamaya,	
and	
annamaya.	
In	this	field	of	activities	the	living
entity	is	considered	to	be	the	enjoyer,	and	different	from	him	is	the
ānandamaya.	
That	means	that	if	the	living	entity	decides	to	enjoy,	in
dovetailing	himself	with	the	
ānandamaya,	
then	he	becomes	perfect.	This	is	the
real	picture	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	as	supreme	knower	of	the	field,	the	living
entity,	as	subordinate	knower,	and	the	nature	of	the	field	of	activities.
TEXTS	6-7
म ह ा भ ू त ा ᇳ य ह ं क ा र ो
	
ब ु द ् ि ध र ᇼ य ᇧ त म े व
	
च
	
।
इ ि ᇳ द ् र य ा ि ण
	
द श ै क ं
	
च
	
प ᇮ च
	
च े ि ᇳ द ् र य ग ो च र ा ः
	
॥
६
॥
इ ᇫ छ ा
	
ሲ े ष ः
	
स ु ख ं
	
द ु ः ख ं
	
स ं घ ा त ᇽ च े त न ा
	
ध ृ ि त ः
	
।
ए त ᇰ ᇤ े त ् र ं
	
स म ा स े न
	
स ि व क ा र म ु द ा ᇦ त म ्
	
॥
७
॥
mahā-bhūtāny	ahaṅkāro
buddhir	avyaktam	eva	ca
indriyāṇi	daśaikaṁ	ca
pañca	cendriya-gocarāḥ
icchā	dveṣaḥ	sukhaṁ	duḥkhaṁ
saṅghātaś	cetanā	dhṛtiḥ
etat	kṣetraṁ	samāsena
sa-vikāram	udāhṛtam
mahā-bhūtāni—
great	elements;	
ahaṅkāraḥ—
false	ego;	
buddhiḥ
—
intelligence;	
avyaktam—
the	unmanifested;	
eva—
certainly;	
ca—
also;
indriyāṇi—	
senses	;	
daśa	ekam—
eleven;	
ca—
also;	
pañca
—five;	
ca
—also;
indriya-gocarāḥ—	
objects	of	the	senses;	
icchā—
desire;	
dveṣaḥ—
hatred;
sukham—
happiness;	
duḥkham—
distress;	
saṅghātaḥ—
the	aggregate;	
cetanā
—
living	symptoms;	
dhṛtiḥ—
conviction;	
etat—
all	this;	
kṣetram—
field	of
activities;	
samāsena—
in	summary;	
sa-vikāram—
interaction;	
udāhṛtam
—
exemplified.
TRANSLATION
The	five	great	elements,	false	ego,	intelligence,	the	unmanifested,	theten	senses,	the	mind,	the	five	sense	objects,	desire,	hatred,	happiness,
distress,	the	aggregate,	the	life	symptoms,	and	convictions—all	these	are
considered,	in	summary,	to	be	the	field	of	activities	and	its	interactions.
PURPORT
From	all	the	authoritative	statements	of	the	great	sages,	the	Vedic	hymns
and	the	aphorisms	of	the	
Vedānta-sūtra,	
the	components	of	this	world	are
earth,	water,	fire,	air	and	ether.	These	are	the	five	great	elements	
(mahābhūta).
Then	there	are	false	ego,	intelligence	and	the	unmanifested	stage	of	the	three
modes	of	nature.	Then	there	are	five	senses	for	acquiring	knowledge:	the	eyes,
ears,	nose,	tongue	and	touch.	Then	five	working	senses:	voice,	legs,	hands,	the
anus	and	the	genitals.	Then,	above	the	senses,	there	is	the	mind,	which	is
within	and	which	can	be	called	the	sense	within.	Therefore,	including	the
mind,	there	are	eleven	senses	altogether.	Then	there	are	the	five	objects	of	the
senses:	smell,	taste,	warmth,	touch	and	sound.	Now	the	aggregate	of	these
twenty-four	elements	is	called	the	field	of	activity.	If	one	makes	an	analytical
study	of	these	twenty-four	subjects,	then	he	can	very	well	understand	the	field
of	activity.	Then	there	is	desire,	hatred,	pleasure	and	pain,	which	are
interactions,	representations	of	the	five	great	elements	in	the	gross	body.	The
living	symptoms,	represented	by	consciousness	and	conviction,	are	the
manifestation	of	the	subtle	body
—	
mind,	ego	and	intelligence.	These	subtle
elements	are	included	within	the	field	of	activities.
The	five	great	elements	are	a	gross	representation	of	the	subtle	false	ego.
They	are	a	representation	in	the	material	conception.	Consciousness	is
represented	by	intelligence,	of	which	the	unmanifested	stage	is	the	three
modes	of	material	nature.	The	unmanifested	three	modes	of	material	nature	is
called	
pradhāna.
One	who	desires	to	know	the	twenty-four	elements	in	detail	along	with	their
interactions	should	study	the	philosophy	in	more	detail.	In	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
a
summary	only	is	given.
The	body	is	the	representation	of	all	these	factors,	and	there	are	changes	of
the	body,	which	are	six	in	number:	the	body	is	born,	it	grows,	it	stays,	it
produces	by-products,	then	begins	to	decay,	and	at	the	last	stage	it	vanishes.
Therefore	the	field	is	a	nonpermanent	material	thing.	However,	the	
kṣetrajña,
the	knower	of	the	field,	its	proprietor,	is	different.
TEXTS	8-12अ म ा ि न ᇰ व म द ि ᇸ भ ᇰ व म ि ह ं स ा
	
ᇤ ा ि ᇳ त र ा ज ᆼ व म ्
	
।
आ च ा य ो ᆼ प ा स न ं
	
श ौ च ं
	
ᇿ थ ै य ᆼ म ा ᇰ म ि व ि न ग ् र ह ः
	
॥
८
॥
इ ि ᇳ द ् र य ा थ ᆹ ष ु
	
व ैर ा ᇩ य म न ह ं क ा र
	
ए व
	
च
	
।
ज ᇳ म म ृ ᇰ य ु ज र ा ᇼ य ा ि ध द ु ः ख द ो ष ा न ु द श ᆼ न म ्
	
॥
९
॥
अ स ि ᇧ त र न ि भ ᇾ व ङ ् ग ः
	
प ु त ् र द ा र ग ृ ह ा ि द ष ु
	
।
ि न ᇰ य ं
	
च
	
स म ि च ሧ ᇰ व ि म ᇾ ट ा ि न ᇾ ट ो प प ि ሧ ष ु
	
॥
१ ०
॥
म ि य
	
च ा न ᇳ य य ो ग े न
	
भ ि ᇧ त र ᇼ य ि भ च ा ि र ण ी
	
।
ि व ि व ᇧ त द े श स े ि व ᇰ व म र ि त ज ᆼ न स ं स ि द
	
॥
१ १
॥
अ ᇲ य ा ᇰ म ᇥ ा न ि न ᇰ य ᇰ व ं
	
त ᇰ ᇰ व ᇥ ा न ा थ ᆼ द श ᆼ न म ्
	
।
ए त ᇬ ᇥ ा न ि म ि त
	
प ् र ो ᇧ त म ᇥ ा न ं
	
य द त ो ऽ ᇳ य थ ा
	
॥
१ २
॥
amānitvam	adambhitvam
ahiṁsā	kṣāntir	ārjavam
ācāryopāsanaṁ	śaucaṁ
sthairyam	ātma-vinigrahaḥ
indriyārtheṣu	vairāgyam
anahaṅkāra	eva	ca
janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-
duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam
asaktir	anabhiṣvaṅgaḥ
putra-dāra-gṛhādiṣu
nityaṁ	ca	sama-cittatvam
iṣṭāniṣṭopapattiṣu
mayi	cānanya-yogena
bhaktir	avyabhicāriṇī
vivikta-deśa-sevitvam
aratir	jana-saṁsadi
adhyātma-jñāna-nityatvaṁ
tattva-jñānārtha-darśanam
etaj	jñānam	iti	proktam
ajñānaṁ	yad	ato	'nyathā
amānitvam
—humility;	
adambhitvam—
pridelessness;	
ahiṁsā
—
nonviolence;	
kṣāntiḥ
—tolerance;	
ārjavam
—simplicity;	
ācārya-upāsanam
—
approaching	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master;	
śaucam—
cleanliness;	
sthairyam
—
steadfastness;	
ātma-vinigrahaḥ—
control;	
iṇdriya-artheṣu—
in	the	matter	of
the	senses;	
vairāgyam
—renunciation;	
anahaṅkāraḥ—
being	without	false
egoism;	
eva—	
certainly;	
ca
—also;	
janma
—birth;	
mṛtyu
—death;	
jarā
—oldage;	
vyādhi—
disease;	
duḥkha—
distress;	
doṣa—
fault;	
anudarśanam
—
observing;	
asaktiḥ—
without	attachment;	
anabhiṣvaṅgaḥ—
without	association;
putra
—son;	
dāra
—wife;	
gṛha-ādiṣu—
home,	etc.;	
nityam—
eternal;	
ca
—also;
sama-cittatvam
—equilibrium;	
iṣṭa—
desirable;	
aniṣṭaḥ—
undesirable;
upapattiṣu—
having	obtained;	
mayi—
unto	Me;	
ca—
also;	
ananya-yogena—
by
devotional	service;	
bhaktiḥ—	
devotion;	
avyabhicāriṇī—
constant,	unalloyed;
vivikta
—solitary;	
deśa
—place;	
sevitvam
—aspiring;	
aratiḥ—
without
attachment;	
jana
—people	in	general;	
saṁsadi—
mass;	
adhyātma—
pertaining
to	the	self;	
jñāna
—knowledge;	
nityatvam
—eternity;	
tattva-jñāna
—knowledge
of	the	truth;	
artha
—the	object;	
darśanam—
philosophy;	
etat
—all	this;	
jñānam
—knowledge;	
iti
—thus;	
proktam	
—declared;	
ajñānam
—ignoraṇce;	
yat
—that
which;	
ataḥ
—from	this;	
anyathā
—	others.
TRANSLATION
Humility,	pridelessness,	nonviolence,	tolerance,	simplicity,	approaching
a	bona	fide	spiritual	master,	cleanliness,	steadiness	and	self-control;
renunciation	of	the	objects	of	sense	gratification,	absence	of	false	ego,	the
perception	of	the	evil	of	birth,	death,	old	age	and	disease;	nonattachment
to	children,	wife,	home	and	the	rest,	and	evenmindedness	amid	pleasant
and	unpleasant	events;	constant	and	unalloyed	devotion	to	Me,	resorting
to	solitary	places,	detachment	from	the	general	mass	of	people;	accepting
the	importance	of	self-realization,	and	philosophical	search	for	the
Absolute	Truth—all	these	I	thus	declare	to	be	knowledge,	and	what	is
contrary	to	these	is	ignorance.
PURPORT
This	process	of	knowledge	is	sometimes	misunderstood	by	less	intelligent
men	as	being	the	interaction	of	the	field	of	activity.	But	actually	this	is	the	real
process	of	knowledge.	If	one	accepts	this	process,	then	the	possibility	of
approaching	the	Absolute	Truth	exists.	This	is	not	the	interaction	of	the
tenfold	elements,	as	described	before,	This	is	actually	the	means	to	get	out	of
it.	Of	all	the	descriptions	of	the	process	of	knowledge,	the	most	important
point	is	described	in	the	first	line	of	the	tenth	verse:	The	process	of	knowledge
terminates	in	unalloyed	devotional	service	to	the	Lord.	So,	if	one	does	not
approach,	or	is	not	able	to	approach,	the	transcendental	service	of	the	Lord,then	the	other	nineteen	items	are	of	no	particular	value.	But,	if	one	takes	to
devotional	service	in	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	the	other	nineteen	items
automatically	develop	within	him.	The	principle	of	accepting	a	spiritual
master,	as	mentioned	in	the	seventh	verse,	is	essential.	Even	for	one	who	takes
to	devotional	service,	it	is	most	important.	Transcendental	life	begins	when
one	accepts	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master.	The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
Śrī	Kṛṣṇa,	clearly	states	here	that	this	process	of	knowledge	is	the	actual	path.
Anything	speculated	beyond	this	is	nonsense.
As	for	the	knowledge	outlined	here,	the	items	may	be	analyzed	as	follows:
Humility	means	that	one	should	not	be	anxious	to	have	the	satisfaction	of
being	honored	by	others.	The	material	conception	of	life	makes	us	very	eager
to	receive	honor	from	others,	but	from	the	point	of	view	of	a	man	in	perfect
knowledge
—
who	knows	that	he	is	not	this	body
—
anything,	honor	or	dishonor,
pertaining	to	this	body	is	useless.	One	should	not	be	hankering	after	this
material	deception.	People	are	very	anxious	to	be	famous	for	their	religion,
and	consequently	sometimes	it	is	found	that	without	understanding	the
principles	of	religion,	one	enters	into	some	group,	which	is	not	actually
following	religious	principles,	and	then	wants	to	advertise	himself	as	a
religious	mentor.	As	for	actual	advancement	in	spiritual	science,	one	should
have	a	test	to	see	how	far	he	is	progressing.	He	can	judge	by	these	items.
Nonviolence	is	generally	taken	to	mean	not	killing	or	destroying	the	body,
but	actually	nonviolence	means	not	to	put	others	into	distress.	People	in
general	are	trapped	by	ignorance	in	the	material	concept	of	life,	and	they
perpetually	suffer	material	pains.	So,	unless	one	elevates	people	to	spiritual
knowledge,	one	is	practicing	violence.	One	should	try	his	best	to	distribute
real	knowledge	to	the	people,	so	that	they	may	become	enlightened	and	leave
this	material	entanglement.	That	is	nonviolence.
Tolerance	means	that	one	should	be	practiced	to	bear	insult	and	dishonor
from	others.	If	one	is	engaged	in	the	advancement	of	spiritual	knowledge,
there	will	be	so	many	insults	and	much	dishonor	from	others.	This	is	expected
because	material	nature	is	so	constituted.	Even	a	boy	like	Prahlāda,	who,	only
five	years	old,	was	engaged	in	the	cultivation	of	spiritual	knowledge,	was
endangered	when	his	father	became	antagonistic	to	his	devotion.	The	father
tried	to	kill	him	in	so	many	ways,	but	Prahlāda	tolerated	him.	So,	for	making
advancement	in	spiritual	knowledge,	there	may	be	many	impediments,	but	we
should	be	tolerant	and	continue	our	progress	with	determination.
Simplicity	means	that	without	diplomacy	one	should	be	so	straightforward
that	he	can	disclose	the	real	truth	even	to	an	enemy.	As	for	acceptance	of	the
spiritual	master,	that	is	essential,	because	without	the	instruction	of	a	bona	fidespiritual	master,	one	cannot	progress	in	the	spiritual	science.	One	should
approach	the	spiritual	master	with	all	humility	and	offer	him	all	services	so
that	he	will	be	pleased	to	bestow	his	blessings	upon	the	disciple.	Because	a
bona	fide	spiritual	master	is	a	representative	of	Kṛṣṇa,	if	he	bestows	any
blessings	upon	his	disciple,	that	will	make	the	disciple	immediately	advanced
without	the	disciple's	following	the	regulated	principles.	Or,	the	regulated
principles	will	be	easier	for	one	who	has	served	the	spiritual	master	without
reservation.
Cleanliness	is	essential	for	making	advancement	in	spiritual	life.	There	are
two	kinds	of	cleanliness:	external	and	internal.	External	cleanliness	means
taking	a	bath,	but	for	internal	cleanliness,	one	has	to	think	of	Kṛṣṇa	always
and	chant	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/Hare	Rāma,	Hare
Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,	Hare	Hare.	This	process	cleans	the	accumulated	dust	of
past	
karma	
from	the	mind.
Steadiness	means	that	one	should	be	very	determined	to	make	progress	in
spiritual	life.	Without	such	determination,	one	cannot	make	tangible	progress.
And	self-control	means	that	one	should	not	accept	anything	which	is
detrimental	to	the	path	of	spiritual	progress.	One	should	become	accustomed
to	this	and	reject	anything	which	is	against	the	path	of	spiritual	progress.	This
is	real	renunciation.	The	senses	are	so	strong	that	they	are	always	anxious	to
have	sense	gratification.	One	should	not	cater	to	these	demands,	which	are	not
necessary.	The	senses	should	only	be	gratified	to	keep	the	body	fit	so	that	one
can	discharge	his	duty	in	advancing	in	spiritual	life.	The	most	important	and
uncontrollable	sense	is	the	tongue.	If	one	can	control	the	tongue,	then	there	is
every	possibility	of	controlling	the	other	senses.	The	function	of	the	tongue	is
to	taste	and	to	vibrate.	Therefore,	by	systematic	regulation,	the	tongue	should
always	be	engaged	in	tasting	the	remnants	of	foodstuffs	offered	to	Kṛṣṇa	and
chanting	Hare	Kṛṣṇa.	As	far	as	the	eyes	are	concerned,	they	should	not	be
allowed	to	see	anything	but	the	beautiful	form	of	Kṛṣṇa.	That	will	control	the
eyes.	Similarly,	the	ears	should	be	engaged	in	hearing	about	Kṛṣṇa	and	the
nose	in	smelling	the	flowers	offered	to	Kṛṣṇa.	This	is	the	process	of	devotional
service,	and	it	is	understood	here	that	
Bhagavad-gītā	
is	simply	expounding	the
science	of	devotional	service.	Devotional	service	is	the	main	and	sole
objective.	Unintelligent	commentators	on	the	
Gītā	
try	to	divert	the	mind	of	the
reader	to	other	subjects,	but	there	is	no	other	subject	in	
Bhagavad-	gītā	
but
devotional	service.
False	ego	means	accepting	this	body	as	oneself.	When	one	understands	that
he	is	not	his	body	and	is	spirit	soul,	that	is	real	ego.	Ego	is	there.	False	ego	iscondemned,	but	not	real	ego.	In	the	Vedic	literature,	it	is	said:	
ahaṁ
brahmāsmi.	
I	am	Brahman,	I	am	spirit.	This	"I	am,"	the	sense	of	self,	also
exists	in	the	liberated	stage	of	self-realization.	This	sense	of	"I	am"	is	ego,	but
when	the	sense	of	"I	am"	is	applied	to	this	false	body,	it	is	false	ego.	When	the
sense	of	self	is	applied	to	reality,	that	is	real	ego.	There	are	some	philosophers
who	say	we	should	give	up	our	ego,	but	we	cannot	give	up	our	ego	because
ego	means	identity.	We	ought,	of	course,	to	give	up	the	false	identification
with	the	body.
One	should	try	to	understand	the	distress	of	accepting	birth,	death,	old	age
and	disease.	There	are	descriptions	in	various	Vedic	literatures	of	birth.	In	the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
the	world	of	the	unborn,	the	child's	stay	in	the	womb	of
the	mother,	its	suffering,	etc.,	are	all	very	graphically	described.	It	should	be
thoroughly	understood	that	birth	is	distressful.	Because	we	forget	how	much
distress	we	have	suffered	within	the	womb	of	the	mother,	we	do	not	make	any
solution	to	the	repetition	of	birth	and	death.	Similarly	at	the	time	of	death,
there	are	all	kinds	of	sufferings,	and	they	are	also	mentioned	in	the
authoritative	scriptures.	These	should	be	discussed.	And	as	far	as	disease	and
old	age	are	concerned,	everyone	gets	practical	experience.	No	one	wants	to	be
diseased,	and	no	one	wants	to	become	old,	but	there	is	no	avoiding	these.
Unless	we	have	a	pessimistic	view	of	this	material	life,	considering	the
distresses	of	birth,	death,	old	age	and	disease,	there	is	no	impetus	for	our
making	advancement	in	spiritual	life.
As	for	detachment	from	children,	wife	and	home,	it	is	not	meant	that	one
should	have	no	feeling	for	these.	They	are	natural	objects	of	affection,	but
when	they	are	not	favorable	to	spiritual	progress,	then	one	should	not	be
attached	to	them.	The	best	process	for	making	the	home	pleasant	is	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	If	one	is	in	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	he	can	make	his	home
very	happy	because	this	process	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	very	easy.	One
need	only	chant	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/Hare	Rāma,
Hare	Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,	Hare	Hare,	accept	the	remnants	of	foodstuffs	offered
to	Kṛṣṇa,	have	some	discussion	on	books	like	
Bhagavad-gītā	
and	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam,	
and	engage	oneself	in	Deity	worship.	These	four	will	make	one
happy.	One	should	train	the	members	of	his	family	in	this	way.	The	family
members	can	sit	down	morning	and	evening	and	chant	together	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,
Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/Hare	Rāma,	Hare	Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,
Hare	Hare.	If	one	can	mold	his	family	life	in	this	way	to	develop	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	following	these	four	principles,	then	there	is	no	need	to	change
from	family	life	to	renounced	life.	But	if	it	is	not	congenial,	not	favorable	forspiritual	advancement,	then	family	life	should	be	abandoned.	One	must
sacrifice	everything	to	realize	or	serve	Kṛṣṇa,	just	as	Arjuna	did.	Arjuna	did
not	want	to	kill	his	family	members,	but	when	he	understood	that	these	family
members	were	impediments	to	his	Kṛṣṇa	realization,	he	accepted	the
instruction	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	fought	and	killed	them.	In	all	cases,	one	should	be
detached	from	the	happiness	and	distress	of	family	life	because	in	this	world
one	can	never	be	fully	happy	or	fully	miserable.	Happiness	and	distress	are
concommitant	factors	of	material	life.	One	should	learn	to	tolerate,	as	advised
in	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
One	can	never	restrict	the	coming	and	going	of	happiness
and	distress,	so	one	should	be	detached	from	the	materialistic	way	of	life	and
be	automatically	equiposed	in	both	cases.	Generally,	when	we	get	something
desirable,	we	are	very	happy,	and	when	we	get	something	undesirable,	we	are
distressed.	But	if	we	are	actually	in	the	spiritual	position,	these	things	will	not
agitate	us.	To	reach	that	stage,	we	have	to	practice	unbreakable	devotional
service;	devotional	service	to	Kṛṣṇa	without	deviation	means	engaging	oneself
in	the	nine	processes	of	devotional	service,	chanting,	hearing,	worshiping,
offering	respect,	etc.,	as	described	in	the	last	verse	of	the	Ninth	Chapter.	That
process	should	be	followed.	Naturally,	when	one	is	adapted	to	the	spiritual
way	of	life,	he	will	not	want	to	mix	with	materialistic	men.	That	would	go
against	his	grain.	One	may	test	himself	by	seeing	how	far	he	is	inclined	to	live
in	a	solitary	place	without	unwanted	association.	Naturally	a	devotee	has	no
taste	for	unnecessary	sporting	or	cinema-going	or	enjoying	some	social
function,	because	he	understands	that	these	are	simply	a	waste	of	time.	There
are	many	research	scholars	and	philosophers	who	study	sex	life	or	some	other
subject,	but	according	to	
Bhagavad-gītā,
	such	research	work	and
philosophical	speculation	have	no	value.	That	is	more	or	less	nonsensical.
According	to	
Bhagavad-gītā
,	one	should	make	research	by	philosophical
discretion	into	the	nature	of	the	soul.	One	should	make	research	to	understand
with	what	the	self	is	concerned.	That	is	recommended	here.
As	far	as	self-realization	is	concerned,	it	is	clearly	stated	here	that	
bhakti-
yoga
	is	especially	practical.	As	soon	as	there	is	a	question	of	devotion,	one
must	consider	the	relationship	between	the	Supersoul	and	the	individual	soul.
The	individual	soul	and	the	Supersoul	cannot	be	one,	at	least	not	in	the	
bhakti
conception,	the	devotional	conception	of	life.	This	service	of	the	individual
soul	to	the	Supreme	Soul	is	eternal,	
nityam
,	as	is	clearly	stated.	So	
bhakti
	or
devotional	service	is	eternal.	One	should	be	established	in	that	philosophical
conviction,	otherwise	it	is	only	a	waste	of	time,	ignorance.
In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
,	this	is	explained;	
vadanti	tat	tattva-vidastattvaṁ	yaj	jñānam	advayam.
	"Those	who	are	actually	knowers	of	the
Absolute	Truth	know	that	the	Self	is	realized	in	three	different	phases	as
Brahman,	Paramātmā
	and	
Bhagavān.
"	(
Bhāg
.	1.2.11)	
Bhagavān
	is	the	last
word	in	the	realization	of	the	Absolute	Truth;	therefore	one	should	reach	up	to
that	platform	of	understanding	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	and	thus
engage	in	the	devotional	service	of	the	Lord.	That	is	perfection	of	knowledge.
Beginning	from	practicing	humility	up	to	the	point	of	realization	of	the
Supreme	Truth,	the	Absolute	Personality	of	Godhead,	this	process	is	just	like	a
staircase	beginning	from	the	ground	floor	up	to	the	top	floor.	Now	on	this
staircase	there	are	so	many	people	who	have	reached	the	first	floor,	the	second
or	third	floor,	etc.,	but	unless	one	reaches	the	top	floor,	which	is	the
understanding	of	Kṛṣṇa,	he	is	at	a	lower	stage	of	knowledge.	If	anyone	wants
to	compete	with	God	and	at	the	same	time	make	advancement	in	spiritual
knowledge,	he	will	be	frustrated.	It	is	clearly	stated	that	without	humility
understanding	is	harmful.	To	think	oneself	God	is	most	puffed	up.	Although
the	living	entity	is	always	being	kicked	by	the	stringent	laws	of	material
nature,	still	he	thinks,	"I	am	God"	because	of	ignorance.	One	should	be
humble	and	know	that	he	is	subordinate	to	the	Supreme	Lord.	Due	to	rebellion
against	the	Supreme	Lord,	one	becomes	subordinate	to	material	nature.	One
must	know	and	be	convinced	of	this	truth.
TEXT	13
ᇥ े य ं
	
य ሧ ᇰ प ् र व ቎ य ा ि म
	
य ᇬ ᇥ ा ᇰ व ा ऽ म ृ त म ᇽ न ु त े
	
।
अ न ा ि द म ᇰ प र ं
	
ब ् र ቊ
	
न
	
स ሧ ᇳ न ा स द ु ᇫ य त े
	
॥
१ ३
॥
jñeyaṁ	yat	tat	pravakṣyāmi
yaj	jñātvā'mṛtam	aśnute
anādi	mat-paraṁ	brahma
na	sat	tan	nāsad	ucyate
jñeyam
—knowable;	
yat
—that;	
tat
—which;	
pravakṣyāmi—
I	shall	now
explain;	
yat
—which;	
jñātvā
—knowing;	
amṛtam
—nectar;	
aśnute
—taste;	
anādi
—beginningless;	
mat-param
—subordinate	to	Me;	
brahma—
spirit;	
na
—
neither;	
sat
—cause;	
tat
—that;	
na
—nor;	
asat
—effect;	
ucyate
—is	called.
TRANSLATIONI	shall	now	explain	the	knowable,	knowing	which	you	will	taste	the
eternal.	This	is	beginningless,	and	it	is	subordinate	to	Me.	It	is	called
Brahman,	the	spirit,	and	it	lies	beyond	the	cause	and	effect	of	this
material	world.
PURPORT
The	Lord	has	explained	the	field	of	activities	and	the	knower	of	the	field.
He	has	also	explained	the	process	of	knowing	the	knower	of	the	field	of
activities.	Now	He	is	explaining	the	knowable,	both	the	soul	and	the
Supersoul	respectively.	By	knowledge	of	the	knower,	both	the	soul	and	the
Supersoul,	one	can	relish	the	nectar	of	life.	As	explained	in	the	Second
Chapter,	the	living	entity	is	eternal.	This	is	also	confirmed	here.	There	is	no
specific	date	at	which	the	
jīva
	was	born.	Nor	can	anyone	trace	out	the	history
of	
jīvātmā's	
manifestation	from	the	Supreme	Lord.	Therefore	it	is
beginningless.	The	Vedic	literature	confirms	this:	
na	jāyate	mṛjayate	vā
vipaścit.	
The	knower	of	the	body	is	never	born	and	never	dies,	and	he	is	full	of
knowledge.	The	Supreme	Lord	is	also	stated	in	the	Vedic	literature	as
pradhāna-	kṣetrajña-patir	guṇeśaḥ.	
The	Supreme	Lord	as	the	Supersoul	is	the
chief	knower	of	the	body,	and	He	is	the	master	of	the	three	modes	of	material
nature.	In	the	
smṛti	
it	is	said:	
dāsa-bhūto	harer	eva	nānyasvaiva	kadācana.
The	living	entities	are	eternally	in	the	service	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	This	is
also	confirmed	by	Lord	Caitanya	in	His	teaching;	therefore	the	description	of
Brahman	mentioned	in	this	verse	is	in	relation	to	the	individual	soul,	and
when	the	word	Brahman	is	applied	to	the	living	entity,	it	is	to	be	understood
that	he	is	
vijñānaṁ	brahma	
as	opposed	to	
ananta-brahma.	Ananta-brahma	
is
the	Supreme	Brahman	Personality	of	Godhead.
TEXT	14
स व ᆼ त ः
	
प ा ि ण प ा द ं
	
त ᇰ स व ᆼ त ो ऽ ि ᇤ ि श र ो म ु ख म ्
	
।
स व ᆼ त ः
	
श ् ኄ ि त म ᇺ ल ो क े
	
स व ᆼ म ा व ृ ᇰ य
	
ि त ᇾ ठ ि त
	
॥
१ ४
॥
sarvataḥ	pāṇi-pādaṁ	tat
sarvato	'kṣi-śiro-mukham
sarvataḥ	śrutimal	lokesarvam	āvṛtya	tiṣṭhati
sarvataḥ—
everywhere;	
pāṇi—
hands;	
pādam—
legs;	
tat—
that;	
sarvataḥ—
everywhere;	
akṣi—
eyes;	
śiraḥ—
head;	
mukham—
face;	
sarvataḥ—
everywhere;
śrutimat—
hearing;	
loke—
in	the	world;	
sarvam—
everywhere,	
āvṛtya
—
covering;	
tiṣṭhati—
exists.
TRANSLATION
Everywhere	are	His	hands	and	legs,	His	eyes	and	faces,	and	He	hears
everything.	In	this	way	the	Supersoul	exists.
PURPORT
As	the	sun	exists	diffusing	its	unlimited	rays,	so	does	the	Supersoul,	or
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	He	exists	in	His	all-pervading	form,	and	in
Him	exist	all	the	individual	living	entities,	beginning	from	the	first	great
teacher,	Brahmā,	down	to	the	small	ants.	There	are	unlimited	heads,	legs,
hands	and	eyes,	and	unlimited	living	entities.	All	are	existing	in	and	on	the
Supersoul.	Therefore	the	Supersoul	is	all-pervading.	The	individual	soul,
however,	cannot	say	that	he	has	his	hands,	legs	and	eyes	everywhere.	That	is
not	possible.	If	he	thinks	that	although	under	ignorance	he	is	not	conscious
that	his	hands	and	legs	are	diffused	all	over,	but	when	he	attains	to	proper
knowledge	he	will	come	to	that	stage,	his	thinking	is	contradictory.	This
means	that	the	individual	soul,	having	become	conditioned	by	material	nature,
is	not	supreme.	The	Supreme	is	different	from	the	individual	soul.	The
Supreme	Lord	can	extend	His	hand	without	limit;	the	individual	soul	cannot.
In	
Bhagavad-gītā	
the	Lord	says	that	if	anyone	offers	Him	a	flower,	or	a	fruit,
or	a	little	water,	He	accepts.	If	the	Lord	is	a	far	distance	away,	how	can	He
accept	things?	This	is	the	omnipotence	of	the	Lord:	even	though	He	is	situated
in	His	own	abode,	far,	far	away	from	earth,	He	can	extend	His	hand	to	accept
what	anyone	offers.	That	is	His	potency.	In	the	
Brahmā-saṁhitā	
it	is	stated,
goloka	eva	nivasati:	
although	He	is	always	engaged	in	pastimes	in	His
transcendental	planet,	He	is	all-pervading.	The	individual	soul	cannot	claim
that	he	is	all-pervading.	Therefore	this	verse	describes	the	Supreme	Soul,	the
Personality	of	Godhead,	not	the	individual	soul.TEXT	15
स व ᆹ ि ᇳ द ् र य ग ु ण ा भ ा स ं
	
स व ᆹ ि ᇳ द ् र य ि व व ि ज ᆼ त म ्
	
।
अ स ᇧ त ं
	
स व ᆼ भ ृ ᇫ च ै व
	
ि न ग ु ᆼ ण ं
	
ग ु ण भ ो ᇧ त ृ
	
च
	
॥
१ ५
॥
sarvendriya-guṇābhāsaṁ
sarvendriya-vivarjitam
asaktaṁ	sarva-bhṛc	caiva
nirguṇaṁ	guṇa-bhoktṛ	ca
sarve—
all;	
indriya—
senses;	
guṇa—
qualities;	
ābhāsam—
original	source;
sarva—
all;	
indriya—
senses;	
vivarjitam—
being	without;	
asaktam—
without
attachment;	
sarva-bhṛt—
maintainer	of	everyone;	
ca—
also;	
eva—
certainly;
nirguṇam—
without	material	qualities;	
guṇa-bhoktṛ—
simultaneously	master	of
the	
guṇas
;	
ca
—also.
TRANSLATION
The	Supersoul	is	the	original	source	of	all	senses,	yet	He	is	without
senses.	He	is	unattached,	although	He	is	the	maintainer	of	all	living
beings.	He	transcends	the	modes	of	nature,	and	at	the	same	time	He	is	the
master	of	all	modes	of	material	nature.
PURPORT
The	Supreme	Lord,	although	the	source	of	all	the	senses	of	the	living
entities,	doesn't	have	material	senses	like	they	have.	Actually,	the	individual
souls	have	spiritual	senses,	but	in	conditioned	life	they	are	covered	with	the
material	elements,	and	therefore	the	sense	activities	are	exhibited	through
matter.	The	Supreme	Lord's	senses	are	not	so	covered.	His	senses	are
transcendental	and	are	therefore	called	
nirguṇa.	Guṇa	
means	the	material
modes,	but	His	senses	are	without	material	covering.	It	should	be	understood
that	His	senses	are	not	exactly	like	ours.	Although	He	is	the	source	of	all	our
sensual	activities,	He	has	His	transcendental	senses	which	are
uncontaminated.	This	is	very	nicely	explained	in	the	
Śvetāśvatara	Upaniṣad	
in
the	verse:	
sarvataḥ	pāṇi-pādam.	
The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	has	nohands	which	are	materially	contaminated,	but	He	has	His	hands	and	accepts
whatever	sacrifice	is	offered	to	Him.	That	is	the	distinction	between	the
conditioned	soul	and	the	Supersoul.	He	has	no	material	eyes,	but	He	has	eyes–
otherwise	how	could	He	see?	He	sees	everything,	past,	present	and	future.	He
lives	within	the	heart	of	the	living	being,	and	He	knows	what	we	have	done	in
the	past,	what	we	are	doing	now,	and	what	is	awaiting	us	in	the	future.	This	is
also	confirmed	in	
Bhagavad-gītā:	
He	knows	everything,	but	no	one	knows
Him.	It	is	said	that	the	Supreme	Lord	has	no	legs	like	us,	but	He	can	travel
throughout	space	because	He	has	spiritual	legs.	In	other	words,	the	Lord	is	not
impersonal;	He	has	His	eyes,	legs,	hands	and	everything	else,	and	because	we
are	part	and	parcel	of	the	Supreme	Lord	we	also	have	these	things.	But	His
hands,	legs,	eyes	and	senses	are	not	contaminated	by	material	nature.
Bhagavad-gītā	
also	confirms	that	when	the	Lord	appears	He	appears	as	He
is	by	His	internal	potency.	He	is	not	contaminated	by	the	material	energy
because	He	is	the	Lord	of	material	energy.	In	the	Vedic	literature	we	find	that
His	whole	embodiment	is	spiritual.	He	has	His	eternal	form	called	
sac-cid-
ānanda-vigraha.	
He	is	full	of	all	opulence.	He	is	the	proprietor	of	all	wealth
and	the	owner	of	all	energy.	He	is	the	most	intelligent	and	is	full	of
knowledge.	These	are	some	of	the	symptoms	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.	He	is	maintainer	of	all	living	entities	and	the	witness	of	all
activities.	As	far	as	we	can	understand	from	Vedic	literature,	the	Supreme
Lord	is	always	transcendental.	Although	we	do	not	see	His	head,	face,	hands,
or	legs,	He	has	them,	and	when	we	are	elevated	to	the	transcendental	situation
then	we	can	see	the	Lord's	form.	Due	to	materially	contaminated	senses,	we
cannot	see	His	form.	Therefore	the	impersonalists	who	are	still	materially
affected	cannot	understand	the	Personality	of	Godhead.
TEXT	16
ब ि ह र ᇳ त ᇽ च
	
भ ू त ा न ा म च र ं
	
च र म े व
	
च
	
।
स ू ቎ म ᇰ व ा ሧ द ि व ᇥ े य ं
	
द ू र ᇿ थ ं
	
च ा ि ᇳ त क े
	
च
	
त त ्
	
॥
१ ६
॥
bahir	antaś	ca	bhūtānām
acaraṁ	caram	eva	ca
sūkṣmatvāt	tad	avijñeyaṁ
dūrasthaṁ	cāntike	ca	tatbahiḥ—
outside;	
antaḥ—
inside;	
ca—
also;	
bhūtānām—
of	all	living	entities;
acaram—
not	moving;	
caram—
moving;	
eva—
also;	
ca—
and;	
sūkṣmatvāt—
on
account	of	being	subtle;	
tat—
that;	
avijñeyam—
unknowable;	
dūrasthaṁ—	
far
away;	
ca	antike—
near	also;	
ca—
and;	
tat—
that.
TRANSLATION
The	Supreme	Truth	exists	both	internally	and	externally,	in	the	moving
and	nonmoving.	He	is	beyond	the	power	of	the	material	senses	to	see	or	to
know.	Although	far,	far	away,	He	is	also	near	to	all.
PURPORT
In	Vedic	literature	we	understand	that	Nārāyaṇa,	the	Supreme	Person,	is
residing	both	outside	and	inside	of	every	living	entity.	He	is	present	both	in
the	spiritual	and	material	world.	Although	He	is	far,	far	away,	still	He	is	near
to	us.	These	are	the	statements	of	Vedic	literature.	
Āsīno	dūraṁ	vrajati	śayāno
yāti	sarvataḥ.	
And,	because	He	is	always	engaged	in	transcendental	bliss,	we
cannot	understand	how	He	is	enjoying	His	full	opulence.	We	cannot	see	or
understand	with	these	material	senses.	Therefore	in	the	Vedic	language	it	is
said	that	to	understand	Him	our	material	mind	and	senses	cannot	act.	But	one
who	has	purified	his	mind	and	senses	by	practicing	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	in
devotional	service	can	see	Him	constantly.	It	is	confirmed	in	
Brahma-saṁhitā
that	the	devotee	who	has	developed	love	for	the	Supreme	God	can	see	Him
always,	without	cessation.	And	it	is	confirmed	in	
Bhagavad-gītā	
(11.54)	that
He	can	be	seen	and	understood	only	by	devotional	service.	
Bhaktyā
tvananyayā	śakyaḥ.
TEXT	17
अ ि व भ ᇧ त ं
	
च
	
भ ू त े ष ु
	
ि व भ ᇧ त ि म व
	
च
	
ि ᇿ थ त म ्
	
।
भ ू त भ त ृ ᆼ
	
च
	
त ᇬ ᇥ े य ं
	
ग ् र ि स ᇾ ण ु
	
प ् र भ ि व ᇾ ण ु
	
च
	
॥
१ ७
॥
avibhaktaṁ	ca	bhūteṣu
vibhaktam	iva	ca	sthitam
bhūta-bhartṛ	ca	taj	jñeyaṁgrasiṣṇu	prabhaviṣṇu	ca
avibhaktam—
without	division;	
ca—
also;	
bhūteṣu—
in	every	living	being;
vibhaktam—
divided;	
iva—
as	if;	
ca—
also;	
sthitam—
situated;	
bhūta-bhartṛ—
maintainer	of	all	living	entities;	
ca—
also;	
tat—
that;	
jñeyam—
to	be	understood;
grasiṣṇu
—devours;	
prabhaviṣṇu—
develops;	
ca—
also.
TRANSLATION
Although	the	Supersoul	appears	to	be	divided,	He	is	never	divided.	He
is	situated	as	one.	Although	He	is	the	maintainer	of	every	living	entity,	it
is	to	be	understood	that	He	devours	and	develops	all.
PURPORT
The	Lord	is	situated	in	everyone's	heart	as	the	Supersoul.	Does	that	mean
that	He	has	become	divided?	No.	Actually,	He	is	one.	The	example	is	given	of
the	sun:	the	sun,	at	the	meridian,	is	situated	in	his	place.	But	if	one	goes	for
five	thousand	miles	in	all	directions	and	asks,	"Where	is	the	sun?"	everyone
will	say	that	it	is	shining	on	his	head.	In	the	Vedic	literature	this	example	is
given	to	show	that	although	He	is	undivided,	He	is	situated	as	if	divided.	Also
it	is	said	in	Vedic	literature	that	one	Viṣṇu	is	present	everywhere	by	His
omnipotence,	just	as	the	sun	appears	in	many	places	to	many	persons.	And	the
Supreme	Lord,	although	the	maintainer	of	every	living	entity,	devours
everything	at	the	time	of	annihilation.	This	was	confirmed	in	the	Eleventh
Chapter	when	the	Lord	said	that	He	has	come	to	devour	all	the	warriors
assembled	at	Kurukṣetra.	He	also	mentions	that	in	the	form	of	time	He
devours	also.	He	is	the	annihilator,	the	killer	of	all.	When	there	is	creation,	He
develops	all	from	their	original	state,	and	at	the	time	of	annihilation	He
devours	them.	The	Vedic	hymns	confirm	the	fact	that	He	is	the	origin	of	all
living	entities	and	the	rest	of	al1.	After	creation,	everything	rests	in	His
omnipotence,	and	after	annihilation,	everything	again	returns	to	rest	in	Him.
These	are	the	confirmations	of	Vedic	hymns.	
Yato	vā	imāni	bhūtāni	jāyante
yena	jātāni	jīvanti	yat	prayanty	abhisaṁviśanti	tad	brahma	tad	vijijñāsasva
.
(
Taittirīya	Upaniṣad
,	3.1)
TEXT	18ᇬ य ो ि त ष ा म ि प
	
त ᇬ ᇬ य ो ि त ᇿ त म स ः
	
प र म ु ᇫ य त े
	
।
ᇥ ा न ं
	
ᇥ े य ं
	
ᇥ ा न ग ᇸ य ं
	
ᇦ ि द
	
स व ᆼ ᇿ य
	
ि व ि ᇾ ठ त म ्
	
॥
१ ८
॥
jyotiṣām	api	taj	jyotis
tamasaḥ	param	ucyate
jñānaṁ	jñeyaṁ	jñāna-gamyaṁ
hṛdi	sarvasya	viṣṭhitam
jyotiṣām
—in	all	luminous	objects;	
api
—also;	
tat
—that;	
jyotiḥ
—source	of
light;	
tamasaḥ
—of	the	darkness;	
param
—beyond;	
ucyate
—is	said;	
jñānam
—
knowledge;	
jñeyam
—to	be	known;	
jñāna-gamyam
—to	be	approached	by
knowledge;	
hṛdi
—in	the	heart;	
sarvasya
—of	everyone;	
viṣṭhitam
—situated.
TRANSLATION
He	is	the	source	of	light	in	all	luminous	objects.	He	is	beyond	the
darkness	of	matter	and	is	unmanifested.	He	is	knowledge,	He	is	the	object
of	knowledge,	and	He	is	the	goal	of	knowledge.	He	is	situated	in
everyone's	heart.
PURPORT
The	Supersoul,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	is	the	source	of	light
in	all	luminous	objects	like	the	sun,	moon,	stars,	etc.	In	the	Vedic	literature	we
find	that	in	the	spiritual	kingdom	there	is	no	need	of	sun	or	moon	because	the
effulgence	of	the	Supreme	Lord	is	there.	In	the	material	world	that
brahmajyoti,
	the	Lord's	spiritual	effulgence,	is	covered	by	the	
mahat-tattva
,
the	material	elements;	therefore	in	this	material	world	we	require	the
assistance	of	sun,	moon,	electricity,	etc.,	for	light.	But	in	the	spiritual	world
there	is	no	need	of	such	things.	It	is	clearly	stated	in	the	Vedic	literature	that
because	of	His	luminous	effulgence,	everything	is	illuminated.	It	is	clear,
therefore,	that	His	situation	is	not	in	the	material	world.	He	is	situated	in	the
spiritual	world	which	is	far,	far	away	in	the	spiritual	sky.	That	is	also
confirmed	in	the	Vedic	literature.	
Āditya-varṇam	tamasaḥ	parastāt
.	He	is	just
like	the	sun,	eternally	luminous,	but	He	is	far,	far	beyond	the	darkness	of	this
material	world.	His	knowledge	is	transcendental.	The	Vedic	literature
confirms	that	Brahman	is	concentrated	transcendental	knowledge.	To	one	whois	anxious	to	be	transferred	to	that	spiritual	world,	knowledge	is	given	by	the
Supreme	Lord	who	is	situated	in	everyone's	heart.
One	Vedic	
mantra	
says:	
taṁ	ha	devam	ātma-buddhi-prakāśaṁ	mumukṣur
vai	śaraṇam	aham	prapadye.	
One	must	surrender	unto	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead	if	he	at	all	wants	liberation.	As	far	as	the	goal	of
ultimate	knowledge	is	concerned,	it	is	also	confirmed	in	Vedic	literature:	
tam
eva	viditvātimṛtyum	eti.	
"Only	by	knowing	You	can	one	surpass	the	boundary
of	birth	and	death."	He	is	situated	in	everyone's	heart	as	the	supreme
controller.	The	Supreme	has	legs	and	hands	distributed	everywhere,	and	this
cannot	be	said	of	the	individual	soul.	Therefore	that	there	are	two	knowers	of
the	field	of	activity,	the	individual	soul	and	the	Supersoul,	must	be	admitted.
One's	hands	and	legs	are	distributed	locally,	but	Kṛṣṇa's	hands	and	legs	are
distributed	everywhere.	This	is	confirmed	in	the	
Śvetāśvatara	Upaniṣad:
sarvasya	prabhum	īśānaṁ	sarvasya	śaraṇaṁ	bṛhat.	
That	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead,	Supersoul,	is	the	
prabhu	
or	master	of	all	living	entities;	therefore
He	is	the	ultimate	center	of	all	living	entities.	So	there	is	no	denying	the	fact
that	the	Supreme	Supersoul	and	the	individual	soul	are	always	different.
TEXT	19
इ ि त
	
ᇤ े त ् र ं
	
त थ ा
	
ᇥ ा न ं
	
ᇥ े य ं
	
च ो ᇧ त ं
	
स म ा स त ः
	
।
म द ् भ ᇧ त
	
ए त द ् ि व ᇥ ा य
	
म द ् भ ा व ा य ो प प ሱ त े
	
॥
१ ९
॥
iti	kṣetraṁ	tathā	jñānaṁ
jñeyaṁ	coktuṁ	samāsataḥ
mad-bhakta	etad	vijñāya
mad-bhāvāyopapadyate
iti—
thus;	
kṣetram—
field	of	activities	(the	body);	
tathā—
also;	
jñānam—
knowledge;	
jñeyam—
knowable;	
ca—
also;	
uktam—
describe;	
samāsataḥ—
in
summary;	
mat-bhaktaḥ—
My	devotee;	
etat—
all	this;	
vijñāya—
after
understanding;	
mat-bhāvāya—
My	nature;	
upapadyate—
attains.
TRANSLATION
Thus	the	field	of	activities	[the	body],	knowledge,	and	the	knowable
have	been	summarily	described	by	Me.	Only	My	devotees	can	understandthis	thoroughly	and	thus	attain	to	My	nature.
PURPORT
The	Lord	has	described	in	summary	the	body,	knowledge	and	the	knowable.
This	knowledge	is	of	three	things:	the	knower,	the	knowable	and	the	process
of	knowing.	Combined,	these	are	called	
vijñānam,	
or	the	science	of
knowledge.	Perfect	knowledge	can	be	understood	by	the	unalloyed	devotees
of	the	Lord	directly.	Others	are	unable	to	understand.	The	monists	say	that	at
the	ultimate	stage	these	three	items	become	one,	but	the	devotees	do	not
accept	this.	Knowledge	and	development	of	knowledge	mean	understanding
oneself	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	We	are	being	led	by	material	consciousness,
but	as	soon	as	we	transfer	all	consciousness	to	Kṛṣṇa's	activities	and	realize
that	Kṛṣṇa	is	everything,	then	we	attain	real	knowledge.	In	other	words,
knowledge	is	nothing	but	the	preliminary	stage	of	understanding	devotional
service	perfectly.
TEXT	20
प ् र क ृ ि त ं
	
प ु ኄ ष ं
	
च ै व
	
ि व ሬ ᆸ न ा द ी
	
उ भ ा व ि प
	
।
ि व क ा र ा ं ᇽ च
	
ग ु ण ा ं ᇽ च ै व
	
ि व द ् ि ध
	
प ् र क ृ ि त स ᇸ भ व ा न ्
	
॥
२ ०
॥
prakṛtiṁ	puruṣaṁ	caiva
viddhyanādī	ubhāv	api
vikārāṁś	ca	guṇāṁś	caiva
viddhi	prakṛti-sambhavān
prakṛtim—
material	nature;	
puruṣam
—livingentities;	
ca—
also;	
eva
—
certainly;
	viddhi—
must	know;	
anādī
—without	beginning;	
ubhau—
both;	
api
—
also;	
vikārān
—transformation;	
ca
—also;	
guṇān
—three	modes	of	nature;	
ca
—
also;	
eva
—certainly;	
viddhi—
know;	
prakṛti—
material	nature;	
sambhavān
—
produced	of.
TRANSLATION
Material	nature	and	the	living	entities	should	be	understood	to	bebeginningless.	Their	transformations	and	the	modes	of	matter	are
products	of	material	nature.
PURPORT
By	this	knowledge,	the	body,	the	field	of	activities	and	the	knowers	of	the
body	(both	the	individual	soul	and	the	Supersoul)	can	be	known.	The	body	is
the	field	of	activity	and	is	composed	of	material	nature.	It	is	the	individual
soul	which	is	embodied.	Enjoying	the	activities	of	the	body	is	the	
puruṣa,	
or
the	living	entity.	He	is	one	knower,	and	the	other	is	the	Supersoul.	Of	course,
it	is	to	be	understood	that	both	the	Supersoul	and	the	individual	entity	are
different	manifestations	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	The	living
entity	is	in	the	category	of	His	energy,	and	the	Supersoul	is	in	the	category	of
His	personal	expansion.
Both	material	nature	and	the	living	entity	are	eternal.	That	is	to	say	that	they
existed	before	the	creation.	The	material	manifestation	is	from	the	energy	of
the	Supreme	Lord	and	so	also	are	the	living	entities,	but	they	are	of	the
superior	energy.	Both	of	them	existed	before	this	cosmos	was	manifested.
Material	nature	was	absorbed	in	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Mahā-
Viṣṇu,	and	when	it	was	required,	it	was	manifested	by	the	agency	of	
mahat-
tattva.	
Similarly,	the	living	entities	are	also	in	Him,	and	because	they	are
conditioned,	they	are	adverse	to	serving	the	Supreme	Lord.	Thus	they	are	not
allowed	to	enter	into	the	spiritual	sky.	After	the	winding	up	of	material	nature,
these	living	entities	are	again	given	a	chance	to	act	in	the	material	world	and
prepare	themselves	to	enter	into	the	spiritual	world.	That	is	the	mystery	of	this
material	creation.	Actually	the	living	entity	is	originally	the	spiritual	part	and
parcel	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	but	due	to	his	rebellious	nature,	he	is	conditioned
within	material	nature.	It	really	does	not	matter	how	these	living	entities	or
superior	entities	of	the	Supreme	Lord	have	come	in	contact	with	material
nature.	The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	knows,	however,	how	and	why
this	actually	took	place.	In	the	scriptures	the	Lord	says	that	those	attracted	by
this	material	nature	are	undergoing	a	hard	struggle	for	existence.	But	we
should	know	it	with	certainty	from	the	descriptions	of	these	few	verses	that	all
the	transformations	and	influences	of	material	nature	by	the	three	modes	are
also	productions	of	material	nature.	All	transformations	and	variety	in	respect
to	living	entities	are	due	to	the	body.	As	far	as	spirit	is	concerned,	living
entities	are	all	the	same.TEXT	21
क ा य ᆼ क ा र ण क त ृ ᆼ ᇰ व े
	
ह े त ु ः
	
प ् र क ृ ि त ኄ ᇫ य त े
	
।
प ु ኄ ष ः
	
स ु ख द ु ः ख ा न ा ं
	
भ ो ᇧ त ृ ᇰ व े
	
ह े त ु ኄ ᇫ य त े
	
॥
२ १
॥
kārya-kāraṇa-kartṛtve
hetuḥ	prakṛtir	ucyate
puruṣaḥ	sukha-duḥkhānāṁ
bhoktṛtve	hetur	ucyate
kārya—
effect;	
kāraṇa—
cause;	
kartṛtve—
in	the	matter	of	creation;	
hetuḥ—
instrument;	
prakṛtiḥ—
material	nature;	
ucyate—
is	said	to	be;	
puruṣaḥ
—the
living	entities;	
sukha—
happiness;	
duḥkhānām—
of	distresses;	
bhoktṛtve—
in
enjoyment;	
hetuḥ—
instrument;	
ucyate—
issaid	to	be.
TRANSLATION
Nature	is	said	to	be	the	cause	of	all	material	activities	and	effects,
whereas	the	living	entity	is	the	cause	of	the	various	sufferings	and
enjoyments	in	this	world.
PURPORT
The	different	manifestations	of	body	and	senses	among	the	living	entities
are	due	to	material	nature.	There	are	8,400,000	different	species	of	life,	and
these	varieties	are	the	creation	of	the	material	nature.	They	arise	from	the
different	sensual	pleasures	of	the	living	entity,	who	thus	desires	to	live	in	this
body	or	that.	When	he	is	put	into	different	bodies,	he	enjoys	different	kinds	of
happiness	and	distress.	His	material	happiness	and	distress	are	due	to	his	body,
and	not	to	himself	as	he	is.	In	his	original	state	there	is	no	doubt	of	enjoyment;
therefore	that	is	his	real	state.	Because	of	the	desire	to	lord	it	over	material
nature,	he	is	in	the	material	world.	In	the	spiritual	world	there	is	no	such	thing.
The	spiritual	world	is	pure,	but	in	the	material	world	everyone	is	struggling
hard	to	acquire	victims	who	present	different	pleasures	to	the	body.	It	might	be
more	clear	to	state	that	this	body	is	the	effect	of	the	senses.	The	senses	are
instruments	for	gratifying	desire.	Now,	the	sum	total
—
body	and	instrumentsenses
—
are	offered	by	material	nature,	and,	as	will	be	clear	in	the	next	verse,
the	living	entity	is	blessed	or	damned	with	circumstances	according	to	his	past
desire	and	activity.	According	to	one's	desires	and	activities,	material	nature
places	one	in	various	residential	quarters.	The	being	himself	is	the	cause	of	his
attaining	such	residential	quarters	and	his	attendant	enjoyment	or	suffering.
Once	placed	in	some	particular	kind	of	body,	he	comes	under	the	control	of
nature	because	the	body,	being	matter,	acts	according	to	the	laws	of	nature.	At
that	time,	the	living	entity	has	no	power	to	change	that	law.	Suppose	an	entity
is	put	into	the	body	of	a	dog.	As	soon	as	he	is	put	into	the	body	of	a	dog,	he
must	act	like	a	dog.	He	cannot	act	otherwise.	And	if	the	living	entity	is	put
into	the	body	of	a	hog,	then	he	is	forced	to	eat	stool	and	act	like	a	hog.
Similarly,	if	the	living	entity	is	put	into	the	body	of	a	demigod,	he	must	act
according	to	his	body.	This	is	the	law	of	nature.	But	in	all	circumstances,	the
Supersoul	is	with	the	individual	soul.	That	is	explained	in	the	
Vedas	
as
follows:	
dvā
	
suparṇā	sayujā	sakhāyā.	
The	Supreme	Lord	is	so	kind	upon	the
living	entity	that	He	always	accompanies	the	individual	soul	and	in	all
circumstances	is	present	as	the	Supersoul	or	Paramātmā.
TEXT	22
प ु ኄ ष ः
	
प ् र क ृ ि त ᇿ थ ो
	
ि ह
	
भ ु ङ ् ᇧ त े
	
प ् र क ृ ि त ज ा ᇳ ग ु ण ा न ्
	
।
क ा र ण ं
	
ग ु ण स ङ ् ग ो ऽ ᇿ य
	
स द स ሱ ो ि न ज ᇳ म स ु
	
॥
२ २
॥
puruṣaḥ	prakṛti-stho	hi
bhuṅkte	prakṛti-jān	guṇān
kāraṇaṁ	guṇa-saṅgo'sya
sad-asad-yoni-janmasu
puruṣaḥ—
the	living	entity;	
prakṛti-sthaḥ—
being	situated	in	the	material
energy;	
hi—
certainly;	
bhuṅkte—
enjoys;	
prakṛti-jān
—produced	by	the	material
nature;	
guṇān
—modes	of	nature;	
kāraṇam
—cause;	
guṇa-saṅgaḥ
—
association	with	the	modes	of	nature;	
asya
—of	the	living	entity;	
sat-asat
—
good	and	bad;	
yoni
—species	of	life;	
janmasu—
birth.
TRANSLATION
The	living	entity	in	material	nature	thus	follows	the	ways	of	life,enjoying	the	three	modes	of	nature.	This	is	due	to	his	association	with	that
material	nature.	Thus	he	meets	with	good	and	evil	amongst	various
species.
PURPORT
This	verse	is	very	important	for	an	understanding	of	how	the	living	entities
transmigrate	from	one	body	to	another.	It	is	explained	in	the	Second	Chapter
that	the	living	entity	is	transmigrating	from	one	body	to	another	just	as	one
changes	dress.	This	change	of	dress	is	due	to	his	attachment	to	material
existence.	As	long	as	he	is	captivated	by	this	false	manifestation,	he	has	to
continue	transmigrating	from	one	body	to	another.	Due	to	his	desire	to	lord	it
over	material	nature,	he	is	put	into	such	undesirable	circumstances.	Under	the
influence	of	material	desire,	the	entity	is	born	sometimes	as	a	demigod,
sometimes	as	a	man,	sometimes	as	a	beast,	as	a	bird,	as	a	worm,	as	an	aquatic,
as	a	saintly	man,	as	a	bug.	This	is	going	on.	And	in	all	cases	the	living	entity
thinks	himself	to	be	the	master	of	his	circumstances,	yet	he	is	under	the
influence	of	material	nature.
How	he	is	put	into	such	different	bodies	is	explained	here.	It	is	due	to
association	with	the	different	modes	of	nature.	One	has	to	rise,	therefore,
above	the	three	material	modes	and	become	situated	in	the	transcendental
position.	That	is	called	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Unless	one	is	situated	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	his	material	consciousness	will	oblige	him	to	transfer	from	one
body	to	another	because	he	has	material	desires	since	time	immemorial.	But
he	has	to	change	that	conception.	That	change	can	be	effected	only	by	hearing
from	authoritative	sources.	The	best	example	is	here:	Arjuna	is	hearing	the
science	of	God	from	Kṛṣṇa.	The	living	entity,	if	he	submits	to	this	hearing
process,	will	lose	his	long-cherished	desire	to	dominate	material	nature,	and
gradually	and	proportionately,	as	he	reduces	his	long	desire	to	dominate,	he
comes	to	enjoy	spiritual	happiness.	In	a	Vedic	
mantra
	it	is	said	that	as	he
becomes	learned	in	association	with	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	he
proportionately	relishes	his	eternal	blissful	life.
TEXT	23
उ प द ् र ᇾ ट ा न ु म ᇳ त ा
	
च
	
भ त ा ᆼ
	
भ ो ᇧ त ा
	
म ह े ᇽ व र ः
	
।
प र म ा ᇰ म े ि त
	
च ा ᇴ य ु ᇧ त ो
	
द े ह े ऽ ि ᇿ म ᇳ प ु ኄ ष ः
	
प र ः
	
॥
२ ३
॥upadraṣṭānumantā	ca
bhartā	bhoktā	maheśvaraḥ—
paramātmeti	cāpy	ukto
dehe'smin	puruṣaḥ	paraḥ
upadraṣṭā—
overseer;	
anumantā—
permitter;	
ca—
also;	
bhartā—
master;
bhoktā
—supreme	enjoyer;	
maheśvaraḥ—
the	Supreme	Lord;	
paramātmā—
Supersoul;	
iti
—also;	
ca—
and;	
api	uktaḥ—
is	said;	
dehe—
in	this	body;	
asmin—
this;	
puruṣaḥ—
enjoyer;	
paraḥ—
transcendental.
TRANSLATION
Yet	in	this	body	there	is	another,	a	transcendental	enjoyer	who	is	the
Lord,	the	supreme	proprietor,	who	exists	as	the	overseer	and	permitter,
and	who	is	known	as	the	Supersoul.
PURPORT
It	is	stated	here	that	the	Supersoul,	who	is	always	with	the	individual	soul,
is	the	representation	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	He	is	not	an	ordinary	living	entity.
Because	the	monist	philosophers	take	the	knower	of	the	body	to	be	one,	they
think	that	there	is	no	difference	between	the	Supersoul	and	the	individual	soul.
To	clarify	this,	the	Lord	says	that	He	is	the	representation	of	Paramātmā	in
every	body.	He	is	different	from	the	individual	soul;	He	is	
paraḥ,
transcendental.	The	individual	soul	enjoys	the	activities	of	a	particular	field,
but	the	Supersoul	is	present	not	as	finite	enjoyer	nor	as	one	taking	part	in
bodily	activities,	but	as	the	witness,	overseer,	permitter	and	supreme	enjoyer.
His	name	is	Paramātmā,	not	
ātmā,	
and	He	is	transcendental.	It	is	distinctly
clear	that	the	
ātmā	
and	Paramātmā	are	different.	The	Supersoul,	the
Paramātmā,	has	legs	and	hands	everywhere,	but	the	individual	soul	does	not.
And	because	He	is	the	Supreme	Lord,	He	is	present	within	to	sanction	the
individual	soul's	desiring	material	enjoyment.	Without	the	sanction	of	the
Supreme	Soul,	the	individual	soul	cannot	do	anything.	The	individual	is
bhakta	
or	the	sustained,	and	He	is	
bhukta	
or	the	maintainer.	There	are
innumerable	living	entities,	and	He	is	staying	in	them	as	a	friend.
The	fact	is	that	individual	living	entities	are	eternally	part	and	parcel	of	the
Supreme	Lord,	and	both	of	them	are	very	intimately	related	as	friends.	But	theliving	entity	has	the	tendency	to	reject	the	sanction	of	the	Supreme	Lord	and
act	independently	in	an	attempt	to	dominate	the	supreme	nature,	and	because
he	has	this	tendency,	he	is	called	the	marginal	energy	of	the	Supreme	Lord.
The	living	entity	can	be	situated	either	in	the	material	energy	or	the	spiritual
energy.	As	long	as	he	is	conditioned	by	the	material	energy,	the	Supreme
Lord,	as	his	friend,	the	Supersoul,	stays	with	him	just	to	get	him	to	return	to
the	spiritual	energy.	The	Lord	is	always	eager	to	take	him	back	to	the	spiritual
energy,	but	due	to	his	minute	independence,	the	individual	entity	is
continually	rejecting	the	association	of	spiritual	light.	This	misuse	of
independence	is	the	cause	of	his	material	strife	in	the	conditioned	nature.	The
Lord,	therefore,	is	always	giving	instruction	from	within	and	from	without.
From	without	He	gives	instructions	as	stated	in	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
and	from
within	He	tries	to	convince	him	that	his	activities	in	the	material	field	are	not
conducive	to	real	happiness.	"Just	give	it	up	and	turn	your	faith	toward	Me.
Then	you	will	be	happy,"	He	says.	Thus	the	intelligent	person	who	places	his
faith	in	the	Paramātmā	or	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	begins	to
advance	toward	a	blissful	eternal	life	of	knowledge
TEXT	24
य
	
ए व ं
	
व े ि ሧ
	
प ु ኄ ष ं
	
प ् र क ृ ि त ं
	
च
	
ग ु ण ै ः
	
स ह
	
।
स व ᆼ थ ा
	
व त ᆼ म ा न ो ऽ ि प
	
न
	
स
	
भ ू य ो ऽ ि भ ज ा य त े
	
॥
२ ४
॥
ya	evaṁ	vetti	puruṣaṁ
prakṛtiṁ	ca	guṇaiḥ	saha
sarvathā	vartamāno'pi
na	sa	bhūyo	'bhijāyate
yaḥ—
anyone;	
evam—
thus;	
vetti
—understands;	
puruṣam
—the	living
entities;	
prakṛtim—
material	nature;	
ca—
and;	
guṇaiḥ
—modes	of	material
nature;	
saha—
with;	
sarvathā
—by	all	means;	
vartamānaḥ—
situated;	
api—	
in
spite	of;	
na
—never;	
saḥ—
he;	
bhūyaḥ—
again;	
abhijāyate—
takes	his	birth.
TRANSLATION
One	who	understands	this	philosophy	concerning	material	nature,	the
living	entity	and	the	interaction	of	the	modes	of	nature	is	sure	to	attainliberation.	He	will	not	take	birth	here	again,	regardless	of	his	present
position.
PURPORT
Clear	understanding	of	material	nature,	the	Supersoul,	the	individual	soul
and	their	interrelation	makes	one	eligible	to	become	liberated	and	turn	to	the
spiritual	atmosphere	without	being	forced	to	return	to	this	material	nature.
This	is	the	result	of	knowledge.	The	purpose	of	knowledge	is	to	understand
distinctly	that	the	living	entity	has	by	chance	fallen	into	this	material
existence.	By	his	personal	endeavor	in	association	with	authorities,	saintly
persons	and	a	spiritual	master,	he	has	to	understand	his	position	and	then
revert	to	spiritual	consciousness	or	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	by	understanding
Bhagavad-gītā	
as	it	is	explained	by	the	Personality	of	Godhead.	Then	it	is
certain	that	he	will	never	come	again	into	this	material	existence;	he	will	be
transferred	into	the	spiritual	world	for	a	blissful	eternal	life	of	knowledge.
TEXT	25
ᇲ य ा न े न ा ᇰ म ि न
	
प ᇽ य ि ᇳ त
	
क े ि च द ा ᇰ म ा न म ा ᇰ म न ा
	
।
अ ᇳ य े
	
स ा ङ ् ᇨ य े न
	
य ो ग े न
	
क म ᆼ य ो ग े न
	
च ा प र े
	
॥
२ ५
॥
dhyānenātmani	paśyanti
kecid	ātmānam	ātmanā
anye	sāṅkhyena	yogena
karma-yogena	cāpare
dhyānena—
by	meditation;	
ātmani—
self;	
paśyanti—
see;	
kecit—
one;
ātmānam—
Supersoul;	
ātmanā—
by	the	mind;	
anye—
others;	
sāṅkhyena—
by
philosophical	discussion;	
yogena—
by	the	
yoga	
system;	
karma-yogena—
by
activities	without	fruitive	desire;	
ca—
also;	
apare—
others.
TRANSLATION
That	Supersoul	is	perceived	by	some	through	meditation,	by	some
through	the	cultivation	of	knowledge,	and	by	others	through	workingwithout	fruitive	desire.
PURPORT
The	Lord	informs	Arjuna	that	the	conditioned	soul	can	be	divided	into	two
classes	as	far	as	man's	search	for	self-realization	is	concerned.	Those	who	are
atheists,	agnostics	and	skeptics	are	beyond	the	sense	of	spiritual
understanding.	But	there	are	others	who	are	faithful	in	their	understanding	of
spiritual	life,	and	they	are	called	workers	who	have	renounced	fruitive	results.
Those	who	always	try	to	establish	the	doctrine	of	monism	are	also	counted
among	the	atheists	and	agnostics.	In	other	words,	only	the	devotees	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	are	really	capable	of	spiritual	understanding
because	they	understand	that	beyond	this	material	nature	there	is	the	spiritual
world	and	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	who	is	expanded	as	the
Paramātmā,	the	Supersoul	in	everyone,	the	all-pervading	Godhead.	Of	course
there	are	those	who	try	to	understand	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth	by
cultivation	of	knowledge,	and	they	can	be	counted	in	the	second	class.	The
atheistic	philosophers	analyze	this	material	world	into	twenty-four	elements,
and	they	place	the	individual	soul	as	the	twenty-	fifth	item.	When	they	are
able	to	understand	the	nature	of	the	individual	soul	to	be	transcendental	to	the
material	elements,	they	are	able	to	understand	also	that	above	the	individual
soul	there	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	He	is	the	twenty-sixth
element.	Thus	gradually	they	also	come	to	the	standard	of	devotional	service
in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Those	who	work	without	fruitive	results	are	also
perfect	in	their	attitude.	They	are	given	a	chance	to	advance	to	the	platform	of
devotional	service	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Here	it	is	stated	that	there	are	some
people	who	are	pure	in	consciousness	and	who	try	to	find	out	the	Supersoul	by
meditation,	and	when	they	discover	the	Supersoul	within	themselves,	they
become	transcendentally	situated.	Similarly,	there	are	others	who	also	try	to
understand	the	Supreme	Soul	by	cultivation	of	knowledge,	and	there	are
others	who	cultivate	the	
haṭha-yoga	
system	and	who	try	to	satisfy	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	by	childish	activities.
TEXT	26
अ ᇳ य े
	
ᇰ व े व म ज ा न ᇳ त ः
	
श ् ኄ ᇰ व ा ᇳ य े ᇷ य
	
उ प ा स त े
	
।
त े ऽ ि प
	
च ा ि त त र ᇳ ᇰ य े व
	
म ृ ᇰ य ु ं
	
श ् ኄ ि त प र ा य ण ा ः
	
॥
२ ६
॥anye	tv	evam	ajānantaḥ
śrutvānyebhya	upāsate
te'pi	cātitaranty	eva
mṛtyuṁ	śruti-parāyaṇāḥ
anye—
others;	
tu—
but;	
evam—
this;	
ajānantaḥ—
without	spiritual
knowledge;	
śrutvā—
by	hearing;	
anyebhyaḥ—
from	others;	
upāsate—
begin	to
worship;	
te—
they;	
api—
also;	
ca—
and;	
atitaranti—
transcend;	
eva—
certainly;
mṛtyum—
the	path	of	death;	
śruti-parāyaṇāḥ—
inclined	to	the	process	of
hearing.
TRANSLATION
Again	there	are	those	who,	although	not	conversant	in	spiritual
knowledge,	begin	to	worship	the	Supreme	Person	upon	hearing	about
Him	from	others.	Because	of	their	tendency	to	hear	from	authorities,	they
also	transcend	the	path	of	birth	and	death.
PURPORT
This	verse	is	particularly	applicable	to	modern	society	because	in	modern
society	there	is	practically	no	education	in	spiritual	matters.	Some	of	the
people	may	appear	to	be	atheistic	or	agnostic	or	philosophical,	but	actually
there	is	no	knowledge	of	philosophy.	As	for	the	common	man,	if	he	is	a	good
soul,	then	there	is	a	chance	for	advancement	by	hearing.	This	hearing	process
is	very	important.	Lord	Caitanya,	who	preached	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	in	the
modern	world,	gave	great	stress	to	hearing	because	if	the	common	man	simply
hears	from	authoritative	sources,	he	can	progress,	especially,	according	to
Lord	Caitanya,	if	he	hears	the	transcendental	vibration	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare
Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/Hare	Rāma,	Hare	Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,	Hare
Hare.	It	is	stated,	therefore,	that	all	men	should	take	advantage	of	hearing
from	realized	souls	and	gradually	become	able	to	understand	everything.	The
worship	of	the	Supreme	Lord	will	then	undoubtedly	take	place.	Lord	Caitanya
has	said	that	in	this	age	no	one	needs	to	change	his	position,	but	one	should
give	up	the	endeavor	to	understand	the	Absolute	Truth	by	speculative
reasoning.	One	should	learn	to	become	the	servant	of	those	who	are	in
knowledge	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	If	one	is	fortunate	enough	to	take	shelter	of	apure	devotee,	hear	from	him	about	self-realization	and	follow	in	his	footsteps,
he	will	be	gradually	elevated	to	the	position	of	a	pure	devotee.	In	this	verse
particularly	the	process	of	hearing	is	strongly	recommended,	and	this	is	very
appropriate.	Although	the	common	man	is	often	not	as	capable	as	so-called
philosophers,	faithful	hearing	from	an	authoritative	person	will	help	one
transcend	this	material	existence	and	go	back	to	Godhead,	back	to	home.
TEXT	27
य ा व ᇰ स ᇮ ज ा य त े
	
ि क ि ᇮ च ᇰ स ᇰ ᇰ व ं
	
ᇿ थ ा व र ज ङ ् ग म म ्
	
।
ᇤ े त ् र ᇤ े त ् र ᇥ स ं य ो ग ा ሧ द ् ि व द ् ि ध
	
भ र त ष ᆼ भ
	
॥
२ ७
॥
yāvat	saṁjāyate	kiñcit
sattvaṁ	sthāvara-jaṅgamam
kṣetra-kṣetrajña-saṁyogāt
tad	viddhi	bharatarṣabha
yāvat—
whatever;	
saṁjāyate—
takes	place;	
kiñcit—
anything;	
sattvam—
existence;	
sthāvara—
not	moving;	
jaṅgamam—
moving;	
kṣetra—
the	body;
kṣetrajña—
knower	of	the	body;	
saṁyogāt—
union	between;	
tat	viddhi—	
you
must	know	it;	
bharatarṣabha
—O	chief	of	the	Bhāratas.
TRANSLATION
O	chief	of	the	Bhāratas,	whatever	you	see	in	existence,	both	moving	and
unmoving,	is	only	the	combination	of	the	field	of	activities	and	the	knower
of	the	field.
PURPORT
Both	material	nature	and	the	living	entity,	which	were	existing	before	the
creation	of	the	cosmos,	are	explained	in	this	verse.	Whatever	is	created	is	but
a	combination	of	the	living	entity	and	material	nature.	There	are	many
manifestations	like	trees,	mountains	and	hills,	which	are	not	moving,	and	there
are	many	existences	which	are	moving,	and	all	of	them	are	but	combinations
of	material	nature	and	superior	nature,	the	living	entity.	Without	the	touch	ofthe	superior	nature,	the	living	entity,	nothing	can	grow.	Therefore	the
relationship	between	matter	and	nature	is	eternally	going	on,	and	this
combination	is	effected	by	the	Supreme	Lord;	therefore	He	is	the	controller	of
both	the	superior	and	inferior	natures.	The	material	nature	is	created	by	Him,
and	the	superior	nature	is	placed	in	this	material	nature,	and	thus	all	these
activities	and	manifestations	take	place.
TEXT	28
स म ं
	
स व ᆹ ष ु
	
भ ू त े ष ु
	
ि त ᇾ ठ ᇳ त ं
	
प र म े ᇽ व र म ्
	
।
ि व न ᇽ य ᇰ ᇿ व ि व न ᇽ य ᇳ त ं
	
य ः
	
प ᇽ य ि त
	
स
	
प ᇽ य ि त
	
॥
२ ८
॥
samaṁ	sarveṣu	bhūteṣu
tiṣṭhantaṁ	parameśvaram
vinaśyatsv	avinaśyantaṁ
yaḥ	paśyati	sa	paśyati
samam—
equally;	
sarveṣu—
in	all;	
bhūteṣu—
living	entities;	
tiṣṭhantam—
residing;	
parameśvaram—
the	Supersoul;	
vinaśyatsu—
in	the	destructible;
avinaśyantam—
not	destroyed;	
yaḥ—
anyone;	
paśyati—
see;	
saḥ—
he;	
paśyati
—
actually	sees.
TRANSLATION
One	who	sees	the	Supersoul	accompanying	the	individual	soul	in	all
bodies	and	who	understands	that	neither	the	soul	nor	the	Supersoul	is
ever	destroyed,	actually	sees.
PURPORT
Anyone	who	can	see	three	things–the	body,	the	proprietor	of	the	body,	or
individual	soul,	and	the	friend	of	the	individual	soul,	combined	together	by
good	association–is	actually	in	knowledge.	Those	who	are	not	associated	with
the	soul's	friend	are	ignorant;	they	simply	see	the	body,	and	when	the	body	is
destroyed	they	think	that	everything	is	finished,	but	actually	it	is	not	so.	After
the	destruction	of	the	body,	both	the	soul	and	the	Supersoul	exist,	and	they	goon	eternally	in	many	various	moving	and	unmoving	forms.	The	Sanskrit	word
parameśvaram	
is	sometimes	translated	as	the	individual	soul	because	the	soul
is	the	master	of	the	body,	and	after	the	destruction	of	the	body	he	transfers	to
another	form.	In	that	way	he	is	master.	But	there	are	others	who	interpret	this
parameśvaram	
to	be	the	Supersoul.	In	either	case,	both	the	Supersoul	and	the
individual	soul	continue.	They	are	not	destroyed.	One	who	can	see	in	this	way
can	actually	see	what	is	happening.
TEXT	29
स म ं
	
प ᇽ य ि ᇳ ह
	
स व ᆼ त ् र
	
स म व ि ᇿ थ त म ी ᇽ व र म ्
	
।
न
	
ि ह न ᇿ ᇰ य ा ᇰ म न ा ᇰ म ा न ं
	
त त ो
	
य ा ि त
	
प र ा ं
	
ग ि त म ्
	
॥
२ ९
॥
samaṁ	paśyan	hi	sarvatra
samavasthitam	īśvaram
na	hinasty	ātmanātmānaṁ
tato	yāti	parāṁ	gatim
samam
—equally;	
paśyan
—seeing;	
hi—
certainly;	
sarvatra
—everywhere;
samavasthitam—
equally	situated;	
īśvaram
—Supersoul;	
na
—does	not;	
hinasti
—degrade;	
ātmanā
—by	the	mind;	
ātmānam—
the	soul;	
tataḥ	yāti
—then
reaches;	
parām
—the	transcendental;	
gatim
—destination.
TRANSLATION
One	who	sees	the	Supersoul	in	every	living	being	and	equal	everywhere
does	not	degrade	himself	by	his	mind.	Thus	he	approaches	the
transcendental	destination.
PURPORT
The	living	entity,	by	accepting	his	material	existence	as	just	so	much
suffering,	can	become	situated	in	his	spiritual	existence.	If	one	understands
that	the	Supreme	is	situated	in	His	Paramātmā	manifestation	everywhere,	that
is,	if	one	can	see	the	presence	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	in	every
living	thing,	he	does	not	degrade	himself,	and	he	therefore	gradually	advancesin	the	spiritual	world.	The	mind	is	generally	addicted	to	self-	centered
processes;	but	when	the	mind	turns	to	the	Supersoul,	one	becomes	advanced
in	spiritual	understanding.
TEXT	30
प ् र क ृ ᇰ य ै व
	
च
	
क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
ि क ् र य म ा ण ा ि न
	
स व ᆼ श ः
	
।
य ः
	
प ᇽ य ि त
	
त थ ा ᇰ म ा न म क त ा ᆼ र ं
	
स
	
प ᇽ य ि त
	
॥
३ ०
॥
prakṛtyaiva	ca	karmāṇi
kriyamāṇāni	sarvaśaḥ
yaḥ	paśyati	tathātmānam
akartāraṁ	sa	paśyati
prakṛtyā—
material	nature;	
eva—
certainly;	
ca—
also;	
karmāṇi—
activities;
kriyamāṇāni
—engaged	in	performing;	
sarvaśaḥ
—in	all	respects;	
yaḥ
—
anyone	who;	
paśyati—
sees;	
tathā—
also;	
ātmānam
—himself;	
akartāram
—
non-doer;	
saḥ
—he;	
paśyati
—sees	perfectly.
TRANSLATION
One	who	can	see	that	all	activities	are	performed	by	the	body,	which	is
created	of	material	nature,	and	sees	that	the	self	does	nothing,	actually
sees.
PURPORT
This	body	is	made	by	material	nature	under	the	direction	of	the	Supersoul,
and	whatever	activities	are	going	on	in	respect	to	one's	body	are	not	his	doing.
Whatever	one	is	supposed	to	do,	either	for	happiness	or	for	distress,	one	is
forced	to	do	because	of	the	bodily	constitution.	The	self,	however,	is	outside
all	these	bodily	activities.	This	body	is	given	according	to	one's	past	desires.
To	fulfill	desires,	one	is	given	the	body,	with	which	he	acts	accordingly.
Practically	speaking,	the	body	is	a	machine,	designed	by	the	Supreme	Lord,	to
fulfill	desires.	Because	of	desires,	one	is	put	into	difficult	circumstances	to
suffer	or	to	enjoy.	This	transcendental	vision	of	the	living	entity,	whendeveloped,	makes	one	separate	from	bodily	activities.	One	who	has	such	a
vision	is	an	actual	seer.
TEXT	31
य द ा
	
भ ू त प ृ थ ᇩ भ ा व म े क ᇿ थ म न ु प ᇽ य ि त
	
।
त त
	
ए व
	
च
	
ि व ᇿ त ा र ं
	
ब ् र ቊ
	
स ᇸ प ሱ त े
	
त द ा
	
॥
३ १
॥
yadā	bhūta-pṛthag-bhāvam
eka-stham	anupaśyati
tata	eva	ca	vistāraṁ
brahma	sampadyate	tadā
yadā—
when;	
bhūta—
living	entities;	
pṛthak-bhāvam—
separated	entities;
eka-stham—
situated	in	one;	
anupaśyati—
tries	to	see	through	authority;	
tataḥ
eva—
thereafter;	
ca—
also;	
vistāram
—expanded;	
brahma—
the	Absolute;
sampadyate—
attains;	
tadā—
at	that	time.
TRANSLATION
When	a	sensible	man	ceases	to	see	different	identities,	which	are	due	to
different	material	bodies,	he	attains	to	the	Brahman	conception.	Thus	he
sees	that	beings	are	expanded	everywhere.
PURPORT
When	one	can	see	that	the	various	bodies	of	living	entities	arise	due	to	the
different	desires	of	the	individual	soul	and	do	not	actually	belong	to	the	soul
itself,	one	actually	sees.	In	the	material	conception	of	life,	we	find	someone	a
demigod,	someone	a	human	being,	a	dog,	a	cat,	etc.	This	is	material	vision,
not	actual	vision.	This	material	differentiation	is	due	to	a	material	conception
of	life.	After	the	destruction	of	the	material	body,	this	spirit	soul	is	one.	The
spirit	soul,	due	to	contact	with	material	nature,	gets	different	types	of	bodies.
When	one	can	see	this,	he	attains	spiritual	vision;	thus	being	freed	from
differentiations	like	man,	animal,	big,	low,	etc.,	one	becomes	beautified	in	his
consciousness	and	able	to	develop	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	in	his	spiritualidentity.	How	he	then	sees	things	will	be	explained	in	the	next	verse.
TEXT	32
अ न ा ि द ᇰ व ा ि ᇳ न ग ु ᆼ ण ᇰ व ा ᇰ प र म ा ᇰ म ा य म ᇼ य य ः
	
।
श र ी र ᇿ थ ो ऽ ि प
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
न
	
क र ो ि त
	
न
	
ि ल ᇴ य त े
	
॥
३ २
॥
anāditvān	nirguṇatvāt
paramātmāyam	avyayaḥ
śarīra-stho	'pi	kaunteya
na	karoti	na	lipyate
anāditvāt—
due	to	eternity;
	nirguṇatvāt—
due	to	transcendental;	
param
—
beyond	material	nature;	
ātmā
—spirit;	
ayam—
this;	
avyayaḥ—
inexhaustable;
śarīra-sthaḥ	api—
though	dwelling	in	the	body;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of	Kuntī;	
na
karoti—
never	does	anything;	
na	lipyate—
nor	is	he	entangled.
TRANSLATION
Those	with	the	vision	of	eternity	can	see	that	the	soul	is	transcendental,
eternal,	and	beyond	the	modes	of	nature.	Despite	contact	with	the
material	body,	O	Arjuna,	the	soul	neither	does	anything	nor	is	entangled.
PURPORT
A	living	entity	appears	to	be	born	because	of	the	birth	of	the	material	body,
but	actually	the	living	entity	is	eternal;	he	is	not	born,	and	in	spite	of	his	being
situated	in	a	material	body,	he	is	transcendental	and	eternal.	Thus	he	cannot	be
destroyed.	By	nature	he	is	full	of	bliss.	He	does	not	engage	himself	in	any
material	activities;	therefore	the	activities	performed	due	to	his	contact	with
material	bodies	do	not	entangle	him.
TEXT	33
य थ ा
	
स व ᆼ ग त ं
	
स ौ ቎ ᇸ य ा द ा क ा श ं
	
न ो प ि ल ᇴ य त े
	
।
स व ᆼ त ् र ा व ि ᇿ थ त ो
	
द े ह े
	
त थ ा ᇰ म ा
	
न ो प ि ल ᇴ य त े
	
॥
३ ३
॥yathā	sarva-gataṁ	saukṣmyād
ākāśaṁ	nopalipyate
sarvatrāvasthito	dehe
tathātmā	nopalipyate
yathā—
as;	
sarva-gatam—
all-pervading;	
saukṣmyāt—
due	to	being	subtle;
ākāśam—
the	sky;	
na—
never;	
upalipyate—
mixes;	
sarvatra—
everywhere;
avasthitaḥ—
situated;	
dehe—
in	the	body;	
tathā—
such;	
ātmā—
the	self;	
na—
never;	
upalipyate—
mixes.
TRANSLATION
The	sky,	due	to	its	subtle	nature,	does	not	mix	with	anything,	although
it	is	all-pervading.	Similarly,	the	soul,	situated	in	Brahman	vision,	does
not	mix	with	the	body,	though	situated	in	that	body.
PURPORT
The	air	enters	into	water,	mud,	stool	and	whatever	else	is	there;	still	it	does
not	mix	with	anything.	Similarly,	the	living	entity,	even	though	situated	in
varieties	of	bodies,	is	aloof	from	them	due	to	his	subtle	nature.	Therefore	it	is
impossible	to	see	with	the	material	eyes	how	the	living	entity	is	in	contact
with	this	body	and	how	he	is	out	of	it	after	the	destruction	of	the	body.	No	one
in	science	can	ascertain	this.
TEXT	34
य थ ा
	
प ् र क ा श य ᇰ य े क ः
	
क ृ ᇰ ᇿ न ं
	
ल ो क ि म म ं
	
र ि व ः
	
।
ᇤ े त ् र ं
	
ᇤ े त ् र ी
	
त थ ा
	
क ृ ᇰ ᇿ न ं
	
प ् र क ा श य ि त
	
भ ा र त
	
॥
३ ४
॥
yathā	prakāśayaty	ekaḥ
kṛtsnaṁ	lokam	imaṁ	raviḥ
kṣetraṁ	kṣetrī	tathā	kṛtsnaṁ
prakāśayati	bhārata
yathā—
as;	
prakāśayati—
illuminates;	
ekaḥ—
one;	
kṛtsnam—
the	whole;lokam—
universe;	
imam—
this;
	raviḥ—
the	sun,	
kṣetram—
this	body;	
kṣetrī—
the
soul;	
tathā—
similarly;	
kṛtsnam—
all;	
prakāśayati—
illuminates;	
bhārata—
O
son	of	Bharata.
TRANSLATION
O	son	of	Bharata,	as	the	sun	alone	illuminates	all	this	universe,	so	does
the	living	entity,	one	within	the	body,	illuminate	the	entire	body	by
consciousness.
PURPORT
There	are	various	theories	regarding	consciousness.	Here	in	
Bhagavad-	gītā
the	example	of	the	sun	and	the	sunshine	is	given.	As	the	sun	is	situated	in	one
place,	but	is	illuminating	the	whole	universe,	so	a	small	particle	of	spirit	soul,
although	situated	in	the	heart	of	this	body,	is	illuminating	the	whole	body	by
consciousness.	Thus	consciousness	is	the	proof	of	the	presence	of	the	soul,	as
sunshine	or	light	is	the	proof	of	the	presence	of	the	sun.	When	the	soul	is
present	in	the	body,	there	is	consciousness	all	over	the	body,	and	as	soon	as
the	soul	has	passed	from	the	body,	there	is	no	more	consciousness.	This	can	be
easily	understood	by	any	intelligent	man.	Therefore	consciousness	is	not	a
production	of	the	combinations	of	matter.	It	is	the	symptom	of	the	living
entity.	The	consciousness	of	the	living	entity,	although	qualitatively	one	with
the	supreme	consciousness,	is	not	supreme	because	the	consciousness	of	one
particular	body	does	not	share	that	of	another	body.	But	the	Supersoul,	which
is	situated	in	all	bodies	as	the	friend	of	the	individual	soul,	is	conscious	of	all
bodies.	That	is	the	difference	between	supreme	consciousness	and	individual
consciousness.
TEXT	35
ᇤ े त ् र ᇤ े त ् र ᇥ य ो र े व म ᇳ त र ं
	
ᇥ ा न च ᇤ ु ष ा
	
।
भ ू त प ् र क ृ ि त म ो ᇤ ं
	
च
	
य े
	
ि व द ु य ा ᆼ ि ᇳ त
	
त े
	
प र म ्
	
॥
३ ५
॥
kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor	evam
antaraṁ	jñāna-cakṣuṣā
bhūta-prakṛti-mokṣaṁ	caye	vidur	yānti	te	param
kṣetra
—body;	
kṣetrajñayoḥ—
of	the	proprietor	of	the	body;	
evam
—	that;
antaram—
difference;	
jñāna-cakṣuṣā
—by	vision	of	knowledge;	
bhūta	—
living
entity;	
prakṛti—
material	nature;	
mokṣam—
liberation;	
ca—
also;	
ye
—one	who;
viduḥ
—knows;	
yānti—
approaches;	
te—
they;	
param—
Supreme.
TRANSLATION
One	who	knowingly	sees	this	difference	between	the	body	and	the
owner	of	the	body	and	can	understand	the	process	of	liberation	from	this
bondage,	also	attains	to	the	supreme	goal.
PURPORT
The	purport	of	this	Thirteenth	Chapter	is	that	one	should	know	the
distinction	between	the	body,	the	owner	of	the	body,	and	the	Supersoul.	A
faithful	person	should	at	first	have	some	good	association	to	hear	of	God	and
thus	gradually	become	enlightened.	If	one	accepts	a	spiritual	master,	he	can
learn	to	distinguish	between	matter	and	spirit,	and	that	becomes	the
steppingstone	for	further	spiritual	realization.	A	spiritual	master	teaches	his
students	to	get	free	from	the	material	concept	of	life	by	various	instructions.
For	instance,	in	
Bhagavad-gītā	
we	find	Kṛṣṇa	instructing	Arjuna	to	free	him
from	materialistic	considerations.
One	can	understand	that	this	body	is	matter;	it	can	be	analyzed	with	its
twenty-four	elements.	That	is	the	gross	manifestation.	And	the	subtle
manifestation	is	the	mind	and	psychological	effects.	And	the	symptoms	of	life
are	the	interaction	of	these	features.	But	over	and	above	this,	there	is	the	soul,
and	there	is	also	the	Supersoul.	The	soul	and	the	Supersoul	are	two.	This
material	world	is	working	by	the	conjunction	of	the	soul	and	the	twenty-four
material	elements.	One	who	can	see	the	constitution	of	the	whole	material
manifestation	as	this	combination	of	the	soul	and	material	elements	and	also
can	see	the	situation	of	the	Supreme	Soul	becomes	eligible	for	transfer	to	the
spiritual	world.	These	things	are	meant	for	contemplation	and	for	realization,
and	one	should	have	a	complete	understanding	of	this	chapter	with	the	help	of
the	spiritual	master.Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	Thirteenth	Chapter	of	the
Śrīmad-Bhagavad-gītā
	in	the	matter	of	Nature,	the	Enjoyer,	and
Consciousness.Chapter-14
CHAPTER	FOURTEEN
The	Three	Modes	of	Material	Nature
TEXT	1
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
प र ं
	
भ ू य ः
	
प ् र व ቎ य ा ि म
	
ᇥ ा न ा न ा ं
	
ᇥ ा न म ु ሧ म म ्
	
।
य ᇬ ᇥ ा ᇰ व ा
	
म ु न य ः
	
स व ᆹ
	
प र ा ं
	
ि स द ् ि ध ि म त ो
	
ग त ा ः
	
॥
१
॥
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
paraṁ	bhūyaḥ	pravakṣyāmi
jñānānāṁ	jñānam	uttamam
yaj	jñātvā	munayaḥ	sarveparāṁ	siddhim	ito	gatāḥ
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;
	param—
transcendental;
	bhūyaḥ—
again;	
pravakṣyāmi
—I	shall	speak;	
jñānānām—
of	all
knowledge;	
jñānam—
knowledge;	
uttamam—
the	supreme;	
yat—
which;	
jñātvā
—
knowing;	
munayaḥ—
the	sages;	
sarve—
all;	
parām—
transcendental;	
siddhim
—
perfection;	
itaḥ—
from	this	world;	
gatāḥ—
attain.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	Again	I	shall	declare	to	you	this	supreme
wisdom,	the	best	of	all	knowledge,	knowing	which	all	the	sages	have
attained	to	supreme	perfection.
PURPORT
From	the	Seventh	Chapter	to	the	end	of	the	Twelfth	Chapter,	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	in
detail	reveals	the	Absolute	Truth,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Now,
the	Lord	Himself	is	further	enlightening	Arjuna.	If	one	understands	this
chapter	through	the	process	of	philosophical	speculation,	he	will	come	to	an
understanding	of	devotional	service.	In	the	Thirteenth	Chapter,	it	was	clearly
explained	that	by	humbly	developing	knowledge	one	may	possibly	be	freed
from	material	entanglement.	It	has	also	been	explained	that	it	is	due	to
association	with	the	modes	of	nature	that	the	living	entity	is	entangled	in	this
material	world.	Now,	in	this	chapter,	the	Supreme	Personality	explains	what
those	modes	of	nature	are,	how	they	act,	how	they	bind	and	how	they	give
liberation.	The	knowledge	explained	in	this	chapter	is	proclaimed	by	the
Supreme	Lord	to	be	superior	to	the	knowledge	given	so	far	in	other	chapters.
By	understanding	this	knowledge,	various	great	sages	attain	perfection	and
transfer	to	the	spiritual	world.	The	Lord	now	explains	the	same	knowledge	in
a	better	way.	This	knowledge	is	far,	far	superior	to	all	other	processes	of
knowledge	thus	far	explained,	and	knowing	this	many	attain	perfection.	Thus
it	is	expected	that	one	who	understands	this	Fourteenth	Chapter	will	attain
perfection.
TEXT	2इ द ं
	
ᇥ ा न म ु प ा ि श ् र ᇰ य
	
म म
	
स ा ध ᇸ य ᆼ म ा ग त ा ः
	
।
स ग ᆹ ऽ ि प
	
न ो प ज ा य ᇳ त े
	
प ् र ल य े
	
न
	
ᇼ य थ ि ᇳ त
	
च
	
॥
२
॥
idaṁ	jñānam	upāśritya
mama	sādharmyam	āgatāḥ
sarge'pi	nopajāyante
pralaye	na	vyathanti	ca
idam
—this;	
jñānam
—knowledge;	
upāśritya
—taking	shelter	of;	
mama
—
My;	
sādharmyam
—nature;	
āgatāḥ
—attain;	
sarge	api
—even	in	the	creation;
na
—	never;	
upajāyante
—comes	in;	
pralaye
—in	the	annihilation;	
na
—nor;
vyathanti
—disturbed;	
ca
—also.
TRANSLATION
By	becoming	fixed	in	this	knowledge,	one	can	attain	to	the
transcendental	nature,	which	is	like	My	own	nature.	Thus	established,
one	is	not	born	at	the	time	of	creation	nor	disturbed	at	the	time	of
dissolution.
PURPORT
After	acquiring	perfect	transcendental	knowledge,	one	acquires	qualitative
equality	with	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	becoming	free	from	the
repetition	of	birth	and	death.	One	does	not,	however,	lose	his	identity	as	an
individual	soul.	It	is	understood	from	Vedic	literature	that	the	liberated	souls
who	have	reached	the	transcendental	planets	of	the	spiritual	sky	always	look
to	the	lotus	feet	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	being	engaged	in	His	transcendental
loving	service.	So,	even	after	liberation,	the	devotees	do	not	lose	their
individual	identities.
Generally,	in	the	material	world,	whatever	knowledge	we	get	is
contaminated	by	the	three	modes	of	material	nature.	But	knowledge	which	is
not	contaminated	by	the	three	modes	of	nature	is	called	transcendental
knowledge.	As	soon	as	one	is	situated	in	that	transcendental	knowledge,	he	is
on	the	same	platform	as	that	of	the	Supreme	Person.	Those	who	have	no
knowledge	of	the	spiritual	sky	hold	that	after	being	freed	from	the	material
activities	of	the	material	form,	this	spiritual	identity	becomes	formless,without	any	variegatedness.	However,	just	as	there	is	material	variegatedness
in	this	world,	so,	in	the	spiritual	world,	there	is	also	variegatedness.	Those	in
ignorance	of	this	think	that	spiritual	existence	is	opposed	to	material	variety.
But	actually,	in	the	spiritual	sky,	one	attains	spiritual	form.	There	are	spiritual
activities,	and	the	spiritual	situation	is	called	devotional	life.	That	atmosphere
is	said	to	be	uncontaminated,	and	there	one	is	equal	in	quality	with	the
Supreme	Lord.	To	obtain	such	knowledge,	one	must	develop	all	the	spiritual
qualities.	One	who	thus	develops	the	spiritual	qualities	is	not	affected	either
by	the	creation	or	the	destruction	of	the	material	world.
TEXT	3
म म
	
य ो ि न म ᆼ ह ሮ ् र ቊ
	
त ि ᇿ म ᇳ ग भ ᆾ
	
द ध ा ᇸ य ह म ्
	
।
स ᇸ भ व ः
	
स व ᆼ भ ू त ा न ा ं
	
त त ो
	
भ व ि त
	
भ ा र त
	
॥
३
॥
mama	yonir	mahad-brahma
tasmin	garbhaṁ	dadhāmy	aham
sambhavaḥ	sarva-bhūtānāṁ
tato	bhavati	bhārata
mama—
My;
	yoniḥ—
source	of	birth;	
mahat—
the	total	material	existence;
brahma—
supreme;	
tasmin—
in	that;	
garbham—
pregnancy;	
dadhāmi—
create;
aham—
I;
	sambhavaḥ—
possibility;	
sarva-bhūtānām—
of	all	living	entities;
tataḥ—
thereafter;	
bhavati—
becomes;	
bhārata
—O	son	of	Bharata.
TRANSLATION
The	total	material	substance,	called	Brahman,	is	the	source	of	birth,
and	it	is	that	Brahman	that	I	impregnate,	making	possible	the	births	of	all
living	beings,	O	son	of	Bharata.
PURPORT
This	is	an	explanation	of	the	world:	everything	that	takes	place	is	due	to	the
combination	of	
kṣetra	
and	
kṣetrajña,	
the	body	and	the	spirit	soul.	This
combination	of	material	nature	and	the	living	entity	is	made	possible	by	theSupreme	God	Himself.	The	
mahat-tattva	
is	the	total	cause	of	the	total	cosmic
manifestation,	and	because	in	the	total	substance	of	the	material	cause	there
are	three	modes	of	nature,	it	is	sometimes	called	Brahman.	The	Supreme
Personality	impregnates	that	total	substance,	and	thus	innumerable	universes
become	possible.	This	total	material	substance,	the	
mahat-tattva,
	is	described
as	Brahman	in	the	Vedic	literature:	
tasmād	etad	brahma	nāma-rūpam	annaṁ
ca	jāyate.	
Into	that	Brahman	the	seeds	of	the	living	entities	are	impregnated
by	the	Supreme	Person.	The	twenty-four	elements,	beginning	from	earth,
water,	fire	and	air,	are	all	material	energy,	called	
Mahā-brahman,	
or	the	great
Brahman,	the	material	nature.	As	is	explained	in	the	Seventh	Chapter,	beyond
this	there	is	another,	superior	nature–the	living	entity.	In	material	nature	the
superior	nature	is	mixed	by	the	will	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
and	thereafter	all	living	entities	are	born	of	this	material	nature.
The	scorpion	lays	its	eggs	in	piles	of	rice,	and	sometimes	it	is	said	that	the
scorpion	is	born	out	of	rice.	But	the	rice	is	not	the	cause	of	the	scorpion.
Actually,	the	eggs	were	laid	by	the	mother.	Similarly,	material	nature	is	not	the
cause	of	the	birth	of	the	living	entities.	The	seed	is	given	by	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	and	they	only	seem	to	come	out	as	products	of
material	nature.	Thus	every	living	entity,	according	to	his	past	activities,	has	a
different	body,	created	by	this	material	nature,	and	the	entity	can	enjoy	or
suffer	according	to	his	past	deeds.	The	Lord	is	the	cause	of	all	the
manifestations	of	living	entities	in	this	material	world.
TEXT	4
स व ᆼ य ो ि न ष ु
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
म ू त ᆼ य ः
	
स ᇸ भ व ि ᇳ त
	
य ा ः
	
।
त ा स ा ं
	
ब ् र ቊ
	
म ह ሱ ो ि न र ह ं
	
ब ी ज प ् र द ः
	
ि प त ा
	
॥
४
॥
sarva-yoniṣu	kaunteya
mūrtayaḥ	sambhavanti	yāḥ
tāsāṁ	brahma	mahad	yonir
ahaṁ	bīja-pradaḥ	pitā
sarva-yoniṣu—
in	all	species	of	life;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of	Kuntī;	
mūrtayaḥ
—
forms;	
sambhavanti—
as	they	appear;	
yāḥ
—which;	
tāsām—
all	of	them;
brahma—
supreme;	
mahat	yoniḥ—
the	source	of	birth	in	the	material	substance;
aham—
Myself;	
bīja-pradaḥ—
seed-giving;	
pitā
—father.TRANSLATION
It	should	be	understood	that	all	species	of	life,	O	son	of	Kuntī,	are	made
possible	by	birth	in	this	material	nature,	and	that	I	am	the	seed-giving
father.
PURPORT
In	this	verse	it	is	clearly	explained	that	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	is	the	original	father	of	all	living	entities.	The	living	entities
are	combinations	of	the	material	nature	and	the	spiritual	nature.	Such	living
entities	are	seen	not	only	on	this	planet,	but	in	every	planet,	even	in	the
highest	where	Brahmā	is	situated.	Everywhere	there	are	living	entities;	within
the	earth	there	are	living	entities,	even	within	water	and	within	fire.	All	these
appearances	are	due	to	the	mother,	material	nature,	and	Kṛṣṇa's	seed-giving
process.	The	purport	is	that	the	living	entities,	being	impregnated	in	the
material	world,	come	out	and	form	at	the	time	of	creation	according	to	their
past	deeds.
TEXT	5
स ᇰ ᇰ व ं
	
र ज ᇿ त म
	
इ ि त
	
ग ु ण ा ः
	
प ् र क ृ ि त स ᇸ भ व ा ः
	
।
ि न ब ᇲ न ि ᇳ त
	
म ह ा ब ा ह ो
	
द े ह े
	
द े ि ह न म ᇼ य य म ्
	
॥
५
॥
sattvaṁ	rajas	tama	iti
guṇāḥ	prakṛti-sambhavāḥ
nibadhnanti	mahā-bāho
dehe	dehinam	avyayam
sattvam—
mode	of	goodness;	
rajaḥ—
mode	of	passion;	
tamaḥ—
mode	of
ignorance;	
iti—
thus;	
guṇāḥ—
qualities;	
prakṛti—
material	nature;	
sambhavāḥ
—
produced	of;	
nibadhnanti—
does	condition;	
mahā-bāho
—O	mighty-armed
one;	
dehe—
in	this	body;	
dehinam—
the	living	entity;	
avyayam—
eternal.
TRANSLATIONMaterial	nature	consists	of	the	three	modes–goodness,	passion	and
ignorance.	When	the	living	entity	comes	in	contact	with	nature,	he
becomes	conditioned	by	these	modes.
PURPORT
The	living	entity,	because	he	is	transcendental,	has	nothing	to	do	with	this
material	nature.	Still,	because	he	has	become	conditioned	by	the	material
world,	he	is	acting	under	the	spell	of	the	three	modes	of	material	nature.
Because	living	entities	have	different	kinds	of	bodies,	in	terms	of	the	different
aspects	of	nature,	they	are	induced	to	act	according	to	that	nature.	This	is	the
cause	of	the	varieties	of	happiness	and	distress.
TEXT	6
त त ् र
	
स ᇰ ᇰ व ं
	
ि न म ᆼ ल ᇰ व ा ᇰ प ् र क ा श क म न ा म य म ्
	
।
स ु ख स ङ ् ग े न
	
ब ᇲ न ा ि त
	
ᇥ ा न स ङ ् ग े न
	
च ा न घ
	
॥
६
॥
tatra	sattvaṁ	nirmalatvāt
prakāśakam	anāmayam
sukha-saṅgena	badhnāti
jñāna-saṅgena	cānagha
tatra—
thereafter;	
sattvam—
mode	of	goodness;	
nirmalatvāt—
being	purest	in
the	material	world;	
prakāśakam—
illuminating;	
anāmayam—
without	any
sinful	reaction;	
sukha—
happiness;	
saṅgena—
association;	
badhnāti
—
conditions;	
jñāna—
knowledge;	
saṅgena—
association;	
ca—
also;	
anagha
—
O	sinless	one.
TRANSLATION
O	sinless	one,	the	mode	of	goodness,	being	purer	than	the	others,	is
illuminating,	and	it	frees	one	from	all	sinful	reactions.	Those	situated	in
that	mode	develop	knowledge,	but	they	become	conditioned	by	the
concept	of	happiness.PURPORT
The	living	entities	conditioned	by	material	nature	are	of	various	types.	One
is	happy,	another	is	very	active,	and	another	is	helpless.	All	these	types	of
psychological	manifestations	are	causes	of	the	entities'	conditioned	status	in
nature.	How	they	are	differently	conditioned	is	explained	in	this	section	of
Bhagavad-gītā.	
The	mode	of	goodness	is	first	considered.	The	effect	of
developing	the	mode	of	goodness	in	the	material	world	is	that	one	becomes
wiser	than	those	otherwise	conditioned.	A	man	in	the	mode	of	goodness	is	not
so	much	affected	by	material	miseries,	and	he	has	a	sense	of	advancement	in
material	knowledge.	The	representative	type	is	the	
brāhmaṇa,	
who	is
supposed	to	be	situated	in	the	mode	of	goodness.	This	sense	of	happiness	is
due	to	understanding	that,	in	the	mode	of	goodness,	one	is	more	or	less	free
from	sinful	reactions.	Actually,	in	the	Vedic	literature	it	is	said	that	the	mode
of	goodness	means	greater	knowledge	and	a	greater	sense	of	happiness.
The	difficulty	here	is	that	when	a	living	entity	is	situated	in	the	mode	of
goodness,	he	becomes	conditioned	to	feel	that	he	is	advanced	in	knowledge
and	is	better	than	others.	In	this	way	he	becomes	conditioned.	The	best
examples	are	the	scientist	and	philosopher:	each	is	very	proud	of	his
knowledge,	and	because	they	generally	improve	their	living	conditions,	they
feel	a	sort	of	material	happiness.	This	sense	of	advanced	happiness	in
conditioned	life	makes	them	bound	by	the	mode	of	goodness	of	material
nature.	As	such,	they	are	attracted	toward	working	in	the	mode	of	goodness,
and,	as	long	as	they	have	an	attraction	for	working	in	that	way,	they	have	to
take	some	type	of	body	in	the	modes	of	nature.	Thus	there	is	no	likelihood	of
liberation,	or	of	being	transferred	to	the	spiritual	world.	Repeatedly,	one	may
become	a	philosopher,	a	scientist,	or	a	poet,	and,	repeatedly,	become	entangled
in	the	same	disadvantages	of	birth	and	death.	But,	due	to	the	illusion	of	the
material	energy,	one	thinks	that	that	sort	of	life	is	pleasant.
TEXT	7
र ज ो
	
र ा ग ा ᇰ म क ं
	
ि व द ् ि ध
	
त ृ ᇾ ण ा स ङ ् ग स म ु द ् भ व म ्
	
।
त ि ᇳ न ब ᇲ न ा ि त
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
क म ᆼ स ङ ् ग े न
	
द े ि ह न म ्
	
॥
७
॥
rajo	rāgātmakaṁ	viddhitṛṣṇā-saṅga-samudbhavam
tan	nibadhnāti	kaunteya
karma-saṅgena	dehinam
rajaḥ—
mode	of	passion;	
rāga-ātmakam—
born	of	desire	or	lust;	
viddhi—
know;	
tṛṣṇā—
hankering;	
saṅga—
association;	
samudbhavam—
produced	of;	
tat
—
that;	
nibadhnāti—
is	bound;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of	Kuntī;	
karma-saṅgena
—
association	with	fruitive	activity;	
dehinam—
of	the	embodied.
TRANSLATION
The	mode	of	passion	is	born	of	unlimited	desires	and	longings,	O	son	of
Kuntī,	and	because	of	this	one	is	bound	to	material	fruitive	activities.
PURPORT
The	mode	of	passion	is	characterized	by	the	attraction	between	man	and
woman.	Woman	has	attraction	for	man,	and	man	has	attraction	for	woman.
This	is	called	the	mode	of	passion.	And,	when	the	mode	of	passion	is
increased,	one	develops	the	hankering	for	material	enjoyment.	He	wants	to
enjoy	sense	gratification.	For	sense	gratification,	a	man	in	the	mode	of	passion
wants	some	honor	in	society,	or	in	the	nation,	and	he	wants	to	have	a	happy
family,	with	nice	children,	wife,	and	house.	These	are	the	products	of	the
mode	of	passion.	As	long	as	one	is	hankering	after	these	things,	he	has	to
work	very	hard.	Therefore	it	is	clearly	stated	here	that	he	becomes	associated
with	the	fruits	of	his	activities	and	thus	becomes	bound	by	such	activities.	In
order	to	please	his	wife,	children	and	society	and	to	keep	up	his	prestige,	one
has	to	work.	Therefore,	the	whole	material	world	is	more	or	less	in	the	mode
of	passion.	Modern	civilization	is	considered	to	be	advanced	in	the	standards
of	the	mode	of	passion.	Formerly,	the	advanced	condition	was	considered	to
be	in	the	mode	of	goodness.	If	there	is	no	liberation	for	those	in	the	mode	of
goodness,	what	of	those	who	are	entangled	in	the	mode	of	passion?
TEXT	8
त म ᇿ ᇰ व ᇥ ा न ज ं
	
ि व द ् ि ध
	
म ो ह न ं
	
स व ᆼद े ि ह न ा म ्
	
।
प ् र म ा द ा ल ᇿ य ि न द ् र ा ि भ ᇿ त ि ᇳ न ब ᇲ न ा ि त
	
भ ा र त
	
॥
८
॥tamas	tv	ajñāna-jaṁ	viddhi
mohanaṁ	sarva-dehinām
pramādālasya-nidrābhis
tan	nibadhnāti	bhārata
tamaḥ—
mode	of	ignorance;	
tu—
but;	
ajñāna-jam—
products	of	ignorance;
viddhi—
knowing;	
mohanam—
delusion;	
sarva-dehinām—
of	all	embodied
beings;	
pramāda—
madness;	
ālasya—
indolence;	
nidrābhiḥ—
sleep;	
tat—
that;
nibadhnāti—
binds;	
bhārata
—O	son	of	Bharata.
TRANSLATION
O	son	of	Bharata,	the	mode	of	ignorance	causes	the	delusion	of	all
living	entities.	The	result	of	this	mode	is	madness,	indolence	and	sleep,
which	bind	the	conditioned	soul.
PURPORT
In	this	verse	the	specific	application	of	the	word	
tu
	is	very	significant.	This
means	that	the	mode	of	ignorance	is	a	very	peculiar	qualification	of	the
embodied	soul.	This	mode	of	ignorance	is	just	the	opposite	of	the	mode	of
goodness.	In	the	mode	of	goodness,	by	development	of	knowledge,	one	can
understand	what	is	what,	but	the	mode	of	ignorance	is	just	the	opposite.
Everyone	under	the	spell	of	the	mode	of	ignorance	becomes	mad,	and	a
madman	cannot	understand	what	is	what.	Instead	of	making	advancement,	one
becomes	degraded.	The	definition	of	the	mode	of	ignorance	is	stated	in	the
Vedic	literature:	under	the	spell	of	ignorance,	one	cannot	understand	the	thing
as	it	is.	For	example,	everyone	can	see	that	his	grandfather	has	died,	and
therefore	he	will	also	die;	man	is	mortal.	The	children	that	he	conceives	will
also	die.	So	death	is	sure.	Still,	people	are	madly	accumulating	money	and
working	very	hard	all	day	and	night,	not	caring	for	the	eternal	spirit.	This	is
madness.	In	their	madness,	they	are	very	reluctant	to	make	advancement	in
spiritual	understanding.	Such	people	are	very	lazy.	When	they	are	invited	to
associate	for	spiritual	understanding,	they	are	not	much	interested.	They	are
not	even	active	like	the	man	who	is	controlled	by	the	mode	of	passion.	Thus
another	symptom	of	one	embedded	in	the	mode	of	ignorance	is	that	he	sleeps
more	than	is	required.	Six	hours	of	sleep	is	sufficient,	but	a	man	in	the	modeof	ignorance	sleeps	at	least	ten	or	twelve	hours	a	day.	Such	a	man	appears	to
be	always	dejected,	and	is	addicted	to	intoxicants	and	sleeping.	These	are	the
symptoms	of	a	person	conditioned	by	the	mode	of	ignorance.
TEXT	9
स ᇰ ᇰ व ं
	
स ु ख े
	
स ᇮ ज य ि त
	
र ज ः
	
क म ᆼ ि ण
	
भ ा र त
	
।
ᇥ ा न म ा व ृ ᇰ य
	
त ु
	
त म ः
	
प ् र म ा द े
	
स ᇮ ज य ᇰ य ु त
	
॥
९
॥
sattvaṁ	sukhe	sañjayati
rajaḥ	karmaṇi	bhārata
jñānam	āvṛtya	tu	tamaḥ
pramāde	sañjayaty	uta
sattvam
—mode	of	goodness;	
sukhe
—in	happiness;	
sañjayati
—develops;
rajaḥ
—mode	of	passion;	
karmaṇi—
fruits	of	activities;	
bhārata—
O	son	of
Bharata;	
jñānam
—knowledge;	
āvṛtya
—covering;	
tu
—but;	
tamaḥ
—the	mode
of	ignorance;	
pramāde
—in	madness;	
sañjayati
—develops;	
uta
—it	is	said.
TRANSLATION
The	mode	of	goodness	conditions	one	to	happiness,	passion	conditions
him	to	the	fruits	of	action,	and	ignorance	to	madness.
PURPORT
A	person	in	the	mode	of	goodness	is	satisfied	by	his	work	or	intellectual
pursuit,	just	as	a	philosopher,	scientist,	or	educator	may	be	engaged	in	a
particular	field	of	knowledge	and	may	be	satisfied	in	that	way.	A	man	in	the
modes	of	passion	and	goodness	may	be	engaged	in	fruitive	activity;	he	owns
as	much	as	he	can	and	spends	for	good	causes.	Sometimes	he	tries	to	open
hospitals,	give	to	charity	institutions,	etc.	These	are	the	signs	of	one	in	the
mode	of	passion.	And	the	mode	of	ignorance	covers	knowledge.	In	the	mode
of	ignorance,	whatever	one	does	is	neither	good	for	him	nor	for	anyone.
TEXT	10र ज ᇿ त म ᇽ च ा ि भ भ ू य
	
स ᇰ ᇰ व ं
	
भ व ि त
	
भ ा र त
	
।
र ज ः
	
स ᇰ ᇰ व ं
	
त म ᇽ च ै व
	
त म ः
	
स ᇰ ᇰ व ं
	
र ज ᇿ त थ ा
	
॥
१ ०
॥
rajas	tamaś	cābhibhūya
sattvaṁ	bhavati	bhārata
rajaḥ	sattvaṁ	tamaś	caiva
tamaḥ	sattvaṁ	rajas	tathā
rajaḥ
—mode	of	passion;	
tamaḥ
—mode	of	ignorance;	
ca
—also;	
abhibhūya
—also	surpassing;	
sattvam
—mode	of	goodness;	
bhavati
—becomes
prominent;	
bhārata—
O	son	of	Bharata;	
rajaḥ
—mode	of	passion;	
sattvam
—
mode	of	goodness;	
tamaḥ
—mode	of	ignorance;	
ca
—also;	
eva
—like	that;
tamaḥ
—mode	of	ignorance;	
sattvam
—mode	of	goodness;	
rajaḥ
—mode	of
passion;	
tathā
—as	in	this.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes	the	mode	of	passion	becomes	prominent,	defeating	the	mode
of	goodness,	O	son	of	Bharata.	And	sometimes	the	mode	of	goodness
defeats	passion,	and	at	other	times	the	mode	of	ignorance	defeats
goodness	and	passion.	In	this	way	there	is	always	competition	for
supremacy.
PURPORT
When	the	mode	of	passion	is	prominent,	the	modes	of	goodness	and
ignorance	are	defeated.	When	the	mode	of	goodness	is	prominent,	passion	and
ignorance	are	defeated.	And,	when	the	mode	of	ignorance	is	prominent,
passion	and	goodness	are	defeated.	This	competition	is	always	going	on.
Therefore,	one	who	is	actually	intent	on	advancing	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	has
to	transcend	these	three	modes.	The	prominence	of	some	certain	mode	of
nature	is	manifested	in	one's	dealings,	in	his	activities,	in	eating,	etc.	All	this
will	be	explained	in	later	chapters.	But	if	one	wants,	he	can	develop,	by
practice,	the	mode	of	goodness	and	thus	defeat	the	modes	of	ignorance	and
passion.	One	can	similarly	develop	the	mode	of	passion	and	defeat	goodness
and	ignorance.	Or,	one	can	develop	the	mode	of	ignorance	and	defeat
goodness	and	passion.	Although	there	are	these	three	modes	of	materialnature,	if	one	is	determined,	he	can	be	blessed	by	the	mode	of	goodness,	and,
by	transcending	the	mode	of	goodness,	he	can	be	situated	in	pure	goodness,
which	is	called	the	
vāsudeva	
state,	a	state	in	which	one	can	understand	the
science	of	God.	By	the	manifestation	of	particular	activities,	it	can	be
understood	in	what	mode	of	nature	one	is	situated.
TEXT	11
स व ᆼ ሲ ा र े ष ु
	
द े ह े ऽ ि ᇿ म ᇳ प ् र क ा श
	
उ प ज ा य त े
	
।
ᇥ ा न ं
	
य द ा
	
त द ा
	
ि व ሱ ा द ् ि व व ृ ሬ ं
	
स ᇰ ᇰ व ि म ᇰ य ु त
	
॥
१ १
॥
sarva-dvāreṣu	dehe'smin
prakāśa	upajāyate
jñānaṁ	yadā	tadā	vidyād
vivṛddhaṁ	sattvam	ity	uta
sarva-dvāreṣu—
all	the	gates;	
dehe	asmin—
in	this	body;	
prakāśaḥ—
quality
of	illumination;	
upajāyate—
develops;	
jñānam—
knowledge;	
yadā—
when;	
tadā
—
at	that	time;	
vidyāt—
must	know;	
vivṛddham—
increased;	
sattvam—
mode	of
goodness;	
iti—
thus;	
uta—
said.
TRANSLATION
The	manifestations	of	the	mode	of	goodness	can	be	experienced	when
all	the	gates	of	the	body	are	illuminated	by	knowledge.
PURPORT
There	are	nine	gates	in	the	body:	two	eyes,	two	ears,	two	nostrils,	the
mouth,	the	genital	and	the	anus.	In	every	gate,	when	the	symptom	of	goodness
is	illuminated,	it	should	be	understood	that	one	has	developed	the	mode	of
goodness.	In	the	mode	of	goodness,	one	can	see	things	in	the	right	position,
one	can	hear	things	in	the	right	position,	and	one	can	taste	things	in	the	right
position.	One	becomes	cleansed	inside	and	outside.	In	every	gate	there	is
development	of	the	symptoms	of	happiness,	and	that	is	the	position	of
goodness.TEXT	12
ल ो भ ः
	
प ् र व ृ ि ሧ र ा र ᇸ भ ः
	
क म ᆼ ण ा म श म ः
	
ᇿ प ृ ह ा
	
।
र ज ᇿ य े त ा ि न
	
ज ा य ᇳ त े
	
ि व व ृ ሬ े
	
भ र त ष ᆼ भ
	
॥
१ २
॥
lobhaḥ	pravṛttir	ārambhaḥ
karmaṇām	aśamaḥ	spṛhā
rajasy	etāni	jāyante
vivṛddhe	bharatarṣabha
lobhaḥ—
greed;	
pravṛttiḥ—
hankering;	
ārambhaḥ—
endeavor;	
karmaṇām—
of	activities;	
aśamaḥ—
uncontrollable;	
spṛhā—
desire;	
rajasi—
in	the	mode	of
passion;	
etāni—
all	this;	
jāyante—
develop;	
vivṛddhe—
when	there	is	excess;
bharatarṣabha
—O	chief	of	the	descendants	of	Bharata.
TRANSLATION
O	chief	of	the	Bhāratas,	when	there	is	an	increase	in	the	mode	of
passion,	the	symptoms	of	great	attachment,	uncontrollable	desire,
hankering,	and	intense	endeavor	develop.
PURPORT
One	in	the	mode	of	passion	is	never	satisfied	with	the	position	he	has
already	acquired;	he	hankers	to	increase	his	position.	If	he	wants	to	construct	a
residential	house,	he	tries	his	best	to	have	a	palatial	house,	as	if	he	would	be
able	to	reside	in	that	house	eternally.	And	he	develops	a	great	hankering	for
sense	gratification.	There	is	no	end	to	sense	gratification.	He	always	wants	to
remain	with	his	family	and	in	his	house	and	to	continue	the	process	of	sense
gratification.	There	is	no	cessation	of	this.	All	these	symptoms	should	be
understood	as	characteristic	of	the	mode	of	passion.
TEXT	13
अ प ् र क ा श ो ऽ प ् र व ृ ि ሧ ᇽ च
	
प ् र म ा द ो
	
म ो ह
	
ए व
	
च
	
।
त म ᇿ य े त ा ि न
	
ज ा य ᇳ त े
	
ि व व ृ ሬ े
	
क ु ኄ न ᇳ द न
	
॥
१ ३
॥aprakāśo	'pravṛttiś	ca
pramādo	moha	eva	ca
tamasy	etāni	jāyante
vivṛddhe	kuru-nandana
aprakāśaḥ—
darkness;	
apravṛttiḥ—
inactivity;	
ca—
and;	
pramādaḥ
—
madness;	
mohaḥ—
illusion;	
eva—
certainly;	
ca—
also;	
tamasi—
of	the	mode
of	ignorance;	
etāni—
these;	
jāyante—
are	manifested;	
vivṛddhe—
is	developed;
kuru-nandana
—O	son	of	Kuru.
TRANSLATION
O	son	of	Kuru,	when	there	is	an	increase	in	the	mode	of	ignorance,
madness,	illusion,	inertia	and	darkness	are	manifested.
PURPORT
When	there	is	no	illumination,	knowledge	is	absent.	One	in	the	mode	of
ignorance	does	not	work	by	a	regulative	principle;	he	wants	to	act	whimsically
for	no	purpose.	Even	though	he	has	the	capacity	to	work,	he	makes	no
endeavor.	This	is	called	illusion.	Although	consciousness	is	going	on,	life	is
inactive.	These	are	the	symptoms	of	one	in	the	mode	of	ignorance.
TEXT	14
य द ा
	
स ᇰ ᇰ व े
	
प ् र व ृ ሬ े
	
त ु
	
प ् र ल य ं
	
य ा ि त
	
द े ह भ ृ त ्
	
।
त द ो ሧ म ि व द ा ं
	
ल ो क ा न म ल ा ᇳ प ् र ि त प ሱ त े
	
॥
१ ४
॥
yadā	sattve	pravṛddhe	tu
pralayaṁ	yāti	deha-bhṛt
tadottama-vidāṁ	lokān
amalān	pratipadyate
yadā—
when;	
sattve—
mode	of	goodness;	
pravṛddhe
—in	development;	
tu
—
but;	
pralayam—
dissolution;	
yāti—
goes;	
deha-bhṛt—
embodied;	
tadā—
at	that
time;	
uttama-vidām—
of	the	great	sages;	
lokān—
the	planets;	
amalān—
pure;pratipadyate—
attains.
TRANSLATION
When	one	dies	in	the	mode	of	goodness,	he	attains	to	the	pure	higher
planets.
PURPORT
One	in	goodness	attains	higher	planetary	systems,	like	Brahmaloka	or
Janaloka,	and	there	enjoys	godly	happiness.	The	word	
amalān
	is	significant;	it
means	free	from	the	modes	of	passion	and	ignorance.	There	are	impurities	in
the	material	world,	but	the	mode	of	goodness	is	the	purest	form	of	existence	in
the	material	world.	There	are	different	kinds	of	planets	for	different	kinds	of
living	entities.	Those	who	die	in	the	mode	of	goodness	are	elevated	to	the
planets	where	great	sages	and	great	devotees	live.
TEXT	15
र ज ि स
	
प ् र ल य ं
	
ग ᇰ व ा
	
क म ᆼ स ङ ् ि ग ष ु
	
ज ा य त े
	
।
त थ ा
	
प ् र ल ी न ᇿ त म ि स
	
म ू ढ य ो ि न ष ु
	
ज ा य त े
	
॥
१ ५
॥
rajasi	pralayaṁ	gatvā
karma-saṅgiṣu	jāyate
tathā	pralīnas	tamasi
mūḍha-yoniṣu	jāyate
rajasi—
in	passion;	
pralayam—
dissolution;	
gatvā—
attaining;	
karma-saṅgiṣu
—in	the	association	of	fruitive	activities;	
jāyate—
takes	birth;	
tathā
—
thereafter;	
pralīnaḥ—
being	dissolved;	
tamasi—
in	ignorance;	
mūḍha
—
animal;	
yoniṣu—
species;	
jāyate—
take	birth.
TRANSLATION
When	one	dies	in	the	mode	of	passion,	he	takes	birth	among	those
engaged	in	fruitive	activities;	and	when	he	dies	in	the	mode	of	ignorance,he	takes	birth	in	the	animal	kingdom.
PURPORT
Some	people	have	the	impression	that	when	the	soul	reaches	the	platform	of
human	life,	it	never	goes	down	again.	This	is	incorrect.	According	to	this
verse,	if	one	develops	the	mode	of	ignorance,	after	his	death	he	is	degraded	to
the	animal	form	of	life.	From	there	one	has	to	again	elevate	himself,	by
evolutionary	process,	to	come	again	to	the	human	form	of	life.	Therefore,
those	who	are	actually	serious	about	human	life	should	take	to	the	mode	of
goodness	and	in	good	association	transcend	the	modes	and	become	situated	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	This	is	the	aim	of	human	life.	Otherwise,	there	is	no
guarantee	that	the	human	being	will	again	attain	to	the	human	status.
TEXT	16
क म ᆼ ण ः
	
स ु क ृ त ᇿ य ा ह ु ः
	
स ा ि ᇰ ᇰ व क ं
	
ि न म ᆼ ल ं
	
फ ल म ्
	
।
र ज स ᇿ त ु
	
फ ल ं
	
द ु ः ख म ᇥ ा न ं
	
त म स ः
	
फ ल म ्
	
॥
१ ६
॥
karmaṇaḥ	sukṛtasyāhuḥ
sāttvikaṁ	nirmalaṁ	phalam
rajasas	tu	phalaṁ	duḥkham
ajñānaṁ	tamasaḥ	phalam
karmaṇaḥ—
of	work;	
sukṛtasya—
in	the	mode	of	goodness;	
āhuḥ—
said;
sāttvikam—
mode	of	goodness;	
nirmalam—
purified;	
phalam—
result;	
rajasaḥ
—of	the	mode	of	passion;	
tu—
but;	
phalam—
result;	
duḥkham—
misery;
ajñānam
—nonsense;	
tamasaḥ—
of	the	mode	of	ignorance;	
phalam
—result.
TRANSLATION
By	acting	in	the	mode	of	goodness,	one	becomes	purified.	Works	done
in	the	mode	of	passion	result	in	distress,	and	actions	performed	in	the
mode	of	ignorance	result	in	foolishness.
PURPORTBy	pious	activities	in	the	mode	of	goodness	one	is	purified;	therefore	the
sages,	who	are	free	from	all	illusion,	are	situated	in	happiness.	Similarly,
activities	in	the	mode	of	passion	are	simply	miserable.	Any	activity	for
material	happiness	is	bound	to	be	defeated.	If,	for	example,	one	wants	to	have
a	skyscraper,	so	much	human	misery	has	to	be	undergone	before	a	big
skyscraper	can	be	built.	The	financier	has	to	take	much	trouble	to	earn	a	mass
of	wealth,	and	those	who	are	slaving	to	construct	the	building	have	to	render
physical	toil.	The	miseries	are	there.	Thus	
Bhagavad-gītā	
says	that	in	any
activity	performed	under	the	spell	of	the	mode	of	passion,	there	is	definitely
great	misery.	There	may	be	a	little	so-called	mental	happiness–"I	have	this
house	or	this	money"–but	this	is	not	actual	happiness.	As	far	as	the	mode	of
ignorance	is	concerned,	the	performer	is	without	knowledge,	and	therefore	all
his	activities	result	in	present	misery,	and	afterwards	he	will	go	on	toward
animal	life.	Animal	life	is	always	miserable,	although,	under	the	spell	of	the
illusory	energy,	
māyā
,	the	animals	do	not	understand	this.	Slaughtering	poor
animals	is	also	due	to	the	mode	of	ignorance.	The	animal	killers	do	not	know
that	in	the	future	the	animal	will	have	a	body	suitable	to	kill	them.	That	is	the
law	of	nature.	In	human	society,	if	one	kills	a	man	he	has	to	be	hanged.	That	is
the	law	of	the	state.	Because	of	ignorance,	people	do	not	perceive	that	there	is
a	complete	state	controlled	by	the	Supreme	Lord.	Every	living	creature	is	the
son	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	and	He	does	not	tolerate	even	an	ant's	being	killed.
One	has	to	pay	for	it.	So,	indulgence	in	animal	killing	for	the	taste	of	the
tongue	is	the	grossest	kind	of	ignorance.	A	human	being	has	no	need	to	kill
animals	because	God	has	supplied	so	many	nice	things.	If	one	indulges	in
meat-eating	anyway,	it	is	to	be	understood	that	he	is	acting	in	ignorance	and	is
making	his	future	very	dark.	Of	all	kinds	of	animal	killing,	the	killing	of	cows
is	most	vicious	because	the	cow	gives	us	all	kinds	of	pleasure	by	supplying
milk.	Cow	slaughter	is	an	act	of	the	grossest	type	of	ignorance.	In	the	Vedic
literature	the	words	
gobhiḥ	prīṇita-matsaram	
indicate	that	one	who,	being
fully	satisfied	by	milk,	is	desirous	of	killing	the	cow,	is	in	the	grossest
ignorance.	There	is	also	a	prayer	in	the	Vedic	literature	that	states:
namo	brahmaṇya-devāya	go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya	ca
jagaddhitāya	kṛṣṇāya	govindāya	namo	namaḥ.
"My	Lord,	You	are	the	well-wisher	of	the	cows	and	the	
brāhmaṇas,	
and	You
are	the	well-wisher	of	the	entire	human	society	and	world."	The	purport	is	that
special	mention	is	given	in	that	prayer	for	the	protection	of	the	cows	and	thebrāhmaṇas.	Brāhmaṇas	
are	the	symbol	of	spiritual	education,	and	cows	are
the	symbol	of	the	most	valuable	food;	these	two	living	creatures,	the
brāhmaṇas
	and	the	cows,	must	be	given	all	protection—that	is	real
advancement	of	civilization.	In	modern	human	society,	spiritual	knowledge	is
neglected,	and	cow	killing	is	encouraged.	It	is	to	be	understood,	then,	that
human	society	is	advancing	in	the	wrong	direction	and	is	clearing	the	path	to
its	own	condemnation.	A	civilization	which	guides	the	citizens	to	become
animals	in	their	next	lives	is	certainly	not	a	human	civilization.	The	present
human	civilization	is,	of	course,	grossly	misled	by	the	modes	of	passion	and
ignorance.	It	is	a	very	dangerous	age,	and	all	nations	should	take	care	to
provide	the	easiest	process,	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	to	save	humanity	from	the
greatest	danger.
TEXT	17
स ᇰ ᇰ व ा ᇰ स ᇮ ज ा य त े
	
ᇥ ा न ं
	
र ज स ो
	
ल ो भ
	
ए व
	
च
	
।
प ् र म ा द म ो ह ौ
	
त म स ो
	
भ व त ो ऽ ᇥ ा न म े व
	
च
	
॥
१ ७
॥
sattvāt	sañjāyate	jñānaṁ
rajaso	lobha	eva	ca
pramāda-mohau	tamaso
bhavato	'jñānam	eva	ca
sattvāt—
from	the	mode	of	goodness;	
sañjāyate—
develops;	
jñānam—
knowledge;	
rajasaḥ—
from	the	mode	of	passion;	
lobhaḥ—
greed;	
eva—
certainly;	
ca—
also;	
pramāda
—madness;	
mohau—
illusion;	
tamasaḥ—
from	the
mode	of	ignorance;	
bhavataḥ—
develops;	
ajñānam—
nonsense;	
eva—
certainly;
ca—
also.
TRANSLATION
From	the	mode	of	goodness,	real	knowledge	develops;	from	the	mode	of
passion,	grief	develops;	and	from	the	mode	of	ignorance,	foolishness,
madness	and	illusion	develop.
PURPORTSince	the	present	civilization	is	not	very	congenial	to	the	living	entities,
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	recommended.	Through	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	society
will	develop	the	mode	of	goodness.	When	the	mode	of	goodness	is	developed,
people	will	see	things	as	they	are.	In	the	mode	of	ignorance,	people	are	just
like	animals	and	cannot	see	things	clearly.	In	the	mode	of	ignorance,	for
example,	they	do	not	see	that	by	killing	one	animal	they	are	taking	a	chance	of
being	killed	by	the	same	animal	in	the	next	life.	Because	people	have	no
education	in	actual	knowledge,	they	become	irresponsible.	To	stop	this
irresponsibility,	education	for	developing	the	mode	of	goodness	of	the	people
in	general	must	be	there.	When	they	are	actually	educated	in	the	mode	of
goodness,	they	will	become	sober,	in	full	knowledge	of	things	as	they	are.
Then	people	will	be	happy	and	prosperous.	Even	if	the	majority	of	the	people
aren't	happy	and	prosperous,	if	a	certain	percentage	of	the	population	develops
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	becomes	situated	in	the	mode	of	goodness,	then
there	is	the	possibility	for	peace	and	prosperity	all	over	the	world.	Otherwise,
if	the	world	is	devoted	to	the	modes	of	passion	and	ignorance,	there	can	be	no
peace	or	prosperity.	In	the	mode	of	passion,	people	become	greedy,	and	their
hankering	for	sense	enjoyment	has	no	limit.	One	can	see	that	even	if	one	has
enough	money	and	adequate	arrangement	for	sense	gratification,	there	is
neither	happiness	nor	peace	of	mind.	That	is	not	possible	because	one	is
situated	in	the	mode	of	passion.	If	one	wants	happiness	at	all,	his	money	will
not	help	him;	he	has	to	elevate	himself	to	the	mode	of	goodness	by	practicing
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	One	engaged	in	the	mode	of	passion	is	not	only
mentally	unhappy,	but	his	profession	and	occupation	are	also	very
troublesome.	He	has	to	devise	so	many	plans	and	schemes	to	acquire	enough
money	to	maintain	his	status	quo.	This	is	all	miserable.	In	the	mode	of
ignorance,	people	become	mad.	Being	distressed	by	their	circumstances,	they
take	shelter	of	intoxication,	and	thus	they	sink	further	into	ignorance.	Their
future	in	life	is	very	dark.
TEXT	18
ऊ ᇲ व ᆾ
	
ग ᇫ छ ि ᇳ त
	
स ᇰ ᇰ व ᇿ थ ा
	
म ᇲ य े
	
ि त ᇾ ठ ि ᇳ त
	
र ा ज स ा ः
	
।
ज घ ᇳ य ग ु ण व ृ ि ሧ ᇿ थ ा
	
अ ध ो
	
ग ᇫ छ ि ᇳ त
	
त ा म स ा ः
	
॥
१ ८
॥
ūrdhvaṁ	gacchanti	sattva-sthā
madhye	tiṣṭhanti	rājasāḥjaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā
adho	gacchanti	tāmasāḥ
ūrdhvam
—upwards;	
gacchanti
—goes;	
sattva-sthāḥ—
one	who	is	situated	in
the	mode	of	goodness;	
madhye—
in	the	middle;	
tiṣṭhanti
—dwell;	
rājasāḥ—
those	who	are	situated	in	the	mode	of	passion;	
jaghanya—
abominable;	
guṇa
—
quality;	
vṛtti-sthāḥ—
occupation;	
adhaḥ—
down;	
gacchanti—
go;	
tāmasāḥ
—
persons	in	the	mode	of	ignorance.
TRANSLATION
Those	situated	in	the	mode	of	goodness	gradually	go	upward	to	the
higher	planets;	those	in	the	mode	of	passion	live	on	the	earthly	planets;
and	those	in	the	mode	of	ignorance	go	down	to	the	hellish	worlds.
PURPORT
In	this	verse	the	results	of	actions	in	the	three	modes	of	nature	are	more
explicitly	set	forth.	There	is	an	upper	planetary	system,	consisting	of	the
heavenly	planets,	where	everyone	is	highly	elevated.	According	to	the	degree
of	development	of	the	mode	of	goodness,	the	living	entity	can	be	transferred
to	various	planets	in	this	system.	The	highest	planet	is	Satyaloka,	or
Brahmaloka,	where	the	prime	person	of	this	universe,	Lord	Brahmā,	resides.
We	have	seen	already	that	we	can	hardly	calculate	the	wondrous	condition	of
life	in	Brahmaloka,	but	the	highest	condition	of	life,	the	mode	of	goodness,
can	bring	us	to	this.
The	mode	of	passion	is	mixed.	It	is	in	the	middle,	between	the	modes	of
goodness	and	ignorance.	A	person	is	not	always	pure,	but	even	if	he	should	be
purely	in	the	mode	of	passion,	he	will	simply	remain	on	this	earth	as	a	king	or
a	rich	man.	But	because	there	are	mixtures,	one	can	also	go	down.	People	on
this	earth,	in	the	modes	of	passion	or	ignorance,	cannot	forcibly	approach	the
higher	planets	by	machine.	In	the	mode	of	passion,	there	is	also	the	chance	of
becoming	mad	in	the	next	life.
The	lowest	quality,	the	mode	of	ignorance,	is	described	here	as	abominable.
The	result	of	developing	ignorance	is	very,	very	risky.	It	is	the	lowest	quality
in	material	nature.	Beneath	the	human	level	there	are	eight	million	species	of
life:	birds,	beasts,	reptiles,	trees,	etc.,	and,	according	to	the	development	of	themode	of	ignorance,	people	are	brought	down	to	these	abominable	conditions.
The	word	
tāmasāḥ
	is	very	significant	here.	
Tāmasāḥ	
indicates	those	who	stay
continually	in	the	mode	of	ignorance	without	rising	to	a	higher	mode.	Their
future	is	very	dark.
There	is	opportunity	for	men	in	the	modes	of	ignorance	and	passion	to	be
elevated	to	the	mode	of	goodness,	and	that	system	is	called	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	But	one	who	does	not	take	advantage	of	this	opportunity
certainly	will	continue	in	the	lower	modes.
TEXT	19
न ा ᇳ य ं
	
ग ु ण े ᇷ य ः
	
क त ा ᆼ र ं
	
य द ा
	
द ् र ᇾ ट ा न ु प ᇽ य ि त
	
।
ग ु ण े ᇷ य ᇽ च
	
प र ं
	
व े ि ሧ
	
म द ् भ ा व ं
	
स ो ऽ ि ध ग ᇫ छ ि त
	
॥
१ ९
॥
nānyaṁ	guṇebhyaḥ	kartāraṁ
yadā	draṣṭānupaśyati
guṇebhyaś	ca	paraṁ	vetti
mad-bhāvaṁ	so	'dhigacchati
na—
never;	
anyam—
other	than;	
guṇebhyaḥ
—from	the	qualities;	
kartāram
—the	performer;	
yadā
—when;	
draṣṭā	anupaśyati—
he	who	sees	properly;
guṇebhyaḥ	ca—
from	the	modes	of	nature;	
param—
transcendental;	
vetti—
know;	
mat-bhāvam—
My	spiritual	nature;	
saḥ
—he;	
adhigacchati—
is
promoted.
TRANSLATION
When	you	see	that	there	is	nothing	beyond	these	modes	of	nature	in	all
activities	and	that	the	Supreme	Lord	is	transcendental	to	all	these	modes,
then	you	can	know	My	spiritual	nature.
PURPORT
One	can	transcend	all	the	activities	of	the	modes	of	material	nature	simply
by	understanding	them	properly	by	learning	from	the	proper	souls.	The	real
spiritual	master	is	Kṛṣṇa,	and	He	is	imparting	this	spiritual	knowledge	toArjuna.	Similarly,	it	is	from	those	who	are	fully	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	that
one	has	to	learn	this	science	of	activities	in	terms	of	the	modes	of	nature.
Otherwise,	one's	life	will	be	misdirected.	By	the	instruction	of	a	bona	fide
spiritual	master,	a	living	entity	can	know	of	his	spiritual	position,	his	material
body,	his	senses,	how	he	is	entrapped,	and	how	he	is	under	the	spell	of	the
material	modes	of	nature.	He	is	helpless,	being	in	the	grip	of	these	modes,	but
when	he	can	see	his	real	position,	then	he	can	attain	to	the	transcendental
platform,	having	the	scope	for	spiritual	life.	Actually,	the	living	entity	is	not
the	performer	of	different	activities.	He	is	forced	to	act	because	he	is	situated
in	a	particular	type	of	body,	conducted	by	some	particular	mode	of	material
nature.	Unless	one	has	the	help	of	spiritual	authority,	he	cannot	understand	in
what	position	he	is	actually	situated.	With	the	association	of	a	bona	fide
spiritual	master,	he	can	see	his	real	position,	and,	by	such	an	understanding,	he
can	become	fixed	in	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	A	man	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness
is	not	controlled	by	the	spell	of	the	material	modes	of	nature.	It	has	already
been	stated	in	the	Seventh	Chapter	that	one	who	has	surrendered	to	Kṛṣṇa	is
relieved	from	the	activities	of	material	nature.	Therefore	for	one	who	is	able	to
see	things	as	they	are,	the	influence	of	material	nature	gradually	ceases.
TEXT	20
ग ु ण ा न े त ा न त ी ᇰ य
	
त ् र ी ᇳ द े ह ी
	
द े ह स म ु द ् भ व ा न ्
	
।
ज ᇳ म म ृ ᇰ य ु ज र ा द ु ः ख ै ि व ᆼ म ु ᇧ त ो ऽ म ृ त म ᇽ न ु त े
	
॥
२ ०
॥
guṇān	etān	atītya	trīn
dehī	deha-samudbhavān
janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhair
vimukto	'mṛtam	aśnute
guṇān—
qualities;	
etān—
all	these;	
atītya—
transcending;	
trīn—
three;	
dehī—
body;	
deha—
body;	
samudbhavān—
produced	of;	
janma—
birth;	
mṛtyu—	
death;
jarā—
old	age;	
duḥkhaiḥ—
distresses;	
vimuktaḥ—
being	freed	from;	
amṛtam
—
nectar;	
aśnute—
enjoys.
TRANSLATION
When	the	embodied	being	is	able	to	transcend	these	three	modes,	hecan	become	free	from	birth,	death,	old	age	and	their	distresses	and	can
enjoy	nectar	even	in	this	life.
PURPORT
How	one	can	stay	in	the	transcendental	position,	even	in	this	body,	in	full
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	is	explained	in	this	verse.	The	Sanskrit	word	
dehī	
means
embodied.	Although	one	is	within	this	material	body,	by	his	advancement	in
spiritual	knowledge	he	can	be	free	from	the	influence	of	the	modes	of	nature.
He	can	enjoy	the	happiness	of	spiritual	life	even	in	this	body	because,	after
leaving	this	body,	he	is	certainly	going	to	the	spiritual	sky.	But	even	in	this
body	he	can	enjoy	spiritual	happiness.	In	other	words,	devotional	service	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	the	sign	of	liberation	from	this	material	entanglement,
and	this	will	be	explained	in	the	Eighteenth	Chapter.	When	one	is	freed	from
the	influence	of	the	modes	of	material	nature,	he	enters	into	devotional
service.
TEXT	21
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
क ै ि ल ᆼ ङ ् ग ै ᇿ त ् र ी ᇳ ग ु ण ा न े त ा न त ी त ो
	
भ व ि त
	
प ् र भ ो
	
।
ि क म ा च ा र ः
	
क थ ं
	
च ै त ा ं ᇿ त ् र ी ᇳ ग ु ण ा न ि त व त ᆼ त े
	
॥
२ १
॥
arjuna	uvāca
kair	liṅgais	trīn	guṇān	etān
atīto	bhavati	prabho
kim	ācāraḥ	kathaṁ	caitāṁs
trīn	guṇān	ativartate
arjunaḥ	uvāca—
Arjuna	said;	
kaiḥ—
by	which;	
liṅgaiḥ—
symptoms;	
trīn—
three;	
guṇān
—qualities;	
etān—
all	this;	
atītaḥ—
transcend;	
bhavati—
become;
prabho—
my	Lord;	
kim—
what;	
ācāraḥ—
behavior;	
katham—
what;	
ca—
also;
etān—
these;	
trīn—
three;	
guṇān—
qualities;	
ativartate—
transcend.
TRANSLATIONArjuna	inquired:	O	my	dear	Lord,	by	what	symptoms	is	one	known
who	is	transcendental	to	those	modes?	What	is	his	behavior?	And	how
does	he	transcend	the	modes	of	nature?
PURPORT
In	this	verse,	Arjuna's	questions	are	very	appropriate.	He	wants	to	know	the
symptoms	of	a	person	who	has	already	transcended	the	material	modes.	He
first	inquires	of	the	symptoms	of	such	a	transcendental	person.	How	can	one
understand	that	he	has	already	transcended	the	influence	of	the	modes	of
material	nature?	The	second	question	asks	how	he	lives	and	what	his	activities
are.	Are	they	regulated	or	nonregulated?	Then	Arjuna	inquires	of	the	means
by	which	he	can	attain	the	transcendental	nature.	That	is	very	important.
Unless	one	knows	the	direct	means	by	which	one	can	be	situated	always
transcendentally,	there	is	no	possibility	of	showing	the	symptoms.	So	all	these
questions	put	by	Arjuna	are	very	important,	and	the	Lord	answers	them.
TEXTS	22-25
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
प ् र क ा श ं
	
च
	
प ् र व ृ ि ሧ ं
	
च
	
म ो ह म े व
	
च
	
प ा ᇯ ड व
	
।
न
	
ሲ े ि ᇾ ट
	
स ᇸ प ् र व ृ ሧ ा ि न
	
न
	
ि न व ृ ሧ ा ि न
	
क ा ङ ् ᇤ ि त
	
॥
२ २
॥
उ द ा स ी न व द ा स ी न ो
	
ग ु ण ै य ो ᆼ
	
न
	
ि व च ा ᇺ य त े
	
।
ग ु ण ा
	
व त ᆼ ᇳ त
	
इ ᇰ य े व ं
	
य ो ऽ व ि त ᇾ ठ ि त
	
न े ङ ् ग त े
	
॥
२ ३
॥
स म द ु ः ख स ु ख ः
	
ᇿ व ᇿ थ ः
	
स म ल ो ᇾ ट ा ᇽ म क ा ᇮ च न ः
	
।
त ु ᇺ य ि प ् र य ा ि प ् र य ो
	
ध ी र ᇿ त ु ᇺ य ि न ᇳ द ा ᇰ म स ं ᇿ त ु ि त ः
	
॥
२ ४
॥
म ा न ा प म ा न य ो ᇿ त ु ᇺ य ᇿ त ु ᇺ य ो
	
ि म त ् र ा ि र प ᇤ य ो ः
	
।
स व ा ᆼ र ᇸ भ प ि र ᇰ य ा ग ी
	
ग ु ण ा त ी त ः
	
स
	
उ ᇫ य त े
	
॥
२ ५
॥
śrī-bhagavān	uvāca
prakāśaṁ	ca	pravṛttiṁ	ca
moham	eva	ca	pāṇḍava
na	dveṣṭi	sampravṛttāni
na	nivṛttāni	kāṅkṣati
udāsīnavad	āsīno
guṇair	yo	na	vicālyate
guṇā	vartanta	ity	evaṁyo	'vatiṣṭhati	neṅgate
sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ	svasthaḥ
sama-loṣṭāśma-kāñcanaḥ
tulya-priyāpriyo	dhīras
tulya-nindātma-saṁstutiḥ
mānāpamānayos	tulyas
tulyo	mitrāri-pakṣayoḥ
sarvārambha-parityāgī
guṇātītaḥ	sa	ucyate
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
prakāśam
ca—
and	illumination;	
pravṛttim	ca—
and	attachment;	
moham—
illusion;	
eva	ca
—
also;	
pāṇḍava
—O	son	of	Pāṇḍu;	
na	dveṣṭi
—does	not	hate;	
sampravṛttāni—
although	developed;	
na	nivṛttāni—
nor	stop	development;	
kāṅkṣati—
desires;
udāsīnavat—
as	if	neutral;	
āsīnaḥ
—situated;	
guṇaiḥ—
by	the	qualities;	
yaḥ
—
one	who;	
na
—never;	
vicālyate
—is	agitated;	
guṇāḥ
—the	qualities;	
vartante
—
is	situated;	
iti	evam
—knowing	thus;	
yaḥ
—one	who;	
avatiṣṭhati—
remains;	
na
—never;	
iṅgate
—flickering;	
sama
—equally;	
duḥkha—
in	distress;	
sukhaḥ—
in
happiness;	
svasthaḥ
—being	situated	himself;	
sama
—equally;	
loṣṭa—
a	lump
of	earth;	
aśma
—stone;	
kāñcanaḥ
—gold;	
tulya
—equally	disposed;	
priya
—
dear;	
apriyaḥ—
undesirable;	
dhīraḥ—
steadily;	
tulya
—equally;	
nindā—
in
defamation;
	ātma-saṁstutiḥ—
in	praise	of	himself;	
māna—
honor;	
apamānayoḥ
—	
dishonor;	
tulyaḥ—
equally;	
tulyaḥ—
equally;	
mitra—
friend;	
ari—
enemy;
pakṣayoḥ—
in	party;	
sarva—
all;	
ārambhaḥ—
endeavor;	
parityāgī
—renouncer;
guṇa-atītaḥ—
transcendental	to	the	material	modes	of	nature;	
saḥ
—he;	
ucyate
—is	said	to	be.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	He	who	does	not	hate	illumination,	attachment
and	delusion	when	they	are	present,	nor	longs	for	them	when	they
disappear;	who	is	seated	like	one	unconcerned,	being	situated	beyond
these	material	reactions	of	the	modes	of	nature,	who	remains	firm,
knowing	that	the	modes	alone	are	active;	who	regards	alike	pleasure	and
pain,	and	looks	on	a	clod,	a	stone	and	a	piece	of	gold	with	an	equal	eye;
who	is	wise	and	holds	praise	and	blame	to	be	the	same;	who	is	unchanged
in	honor	and	dishonor,	who	treats	friend	and	foe	alike,	who	hasabandoned	all	fruitive	undertakings–such	a	man	is	said	to	have
transcended	the	modes	of	nature.
PURPORT
Arjuna	submitted	the	three	different	questions,	and	the	Lord	answers	them
one	after	another.	In	these	verses,	Kṛṣṇa	first	indicates	that	a	person
transcendentally	situated	neither	envies	anyone	nor	hankers	for	anything.
When	a	living	entity	stays	in	this	material	world	embodied	by	the	material
body,	it	is	to	be	understood	that	he	is	under	the	control	of	one	of	the	three
modes	of	material	nature.	When	he	is	actually	out	of	the	body,	then	he	is	out
of	the	clutches	of	the	material	modes	of	nature.	But	as	long	as	he	is	not	out	of
the	material	body,	he	should	be	neutral.	He	should	engage	himself	in	the
devotional	service	of	the	Lord	so	that	his	identity	with	the	material	body	will
automatically	be	forgotten.	When	one	is	conscious	of	the	material	body,	he
acts	only	for	sense	gratification,	but	when	one	transfers	the	consciousness	to
Kṛṣṇa,	sense	gratification	automatically	stops.	One	does	not	need	this	material
body,	and	he	does	not	need	to	accept	the	dictations	of	the	material	body.	The
qualities	of	the	material	modes	in	the	body	will	act,	but	as	spirit	soul	the	self	is
aloof	from	such	activities.	How	does	he	become	aloof?	He	does	not	desire	to
enjoy	the	body,	nor	does	he	desire	to	get	out	of	it.	Thus	transcendentally
situated,	the	devotee	becomes	automatically	free.	He	need	not	try	to	become
free	from	the	influence	of	the	modes	of	material	nature.
The	next	question	concerns	the	dealings	of	a	transcendentally	situated
person.	The	materially	situated	person	is	affected	by	so-called	honor	and
dishonor	offered	to	the	body,	but	the	transcendentally	situated	person	is	not
affected	by	such	false	honor	and	dishonor.	He	performs	his	duty	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	and	does	not	mind	whether	a	man	honors	or	dishonors	him.	He
accepts	things	that	are	favorable	for	his	duty	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,
otherwise	he	has	no	necessity	of	anything	material,	either	a	stone	or	gold.	He
takes	everyone	as	his	dear	friend	who	helps	him	in	his	execution	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	and	he	does	not	hate	his	so-called	enemy.	He	is	equally
disposed	and	sees	everything	on	an	equal	level	because	he	knows	perfectly
well	that	he	has	nothing	to	do	with	material	existence.	Social	and	political
issues	do	not	affect	him	because	he	knows	the	situation	of	temporary
upheavals	and	disturbances.	He	does	not	attempt	anything	for	his	own	sake.
He	can	attempt	anything	for	Kṛṣṇa,	but	for	his	personal	self	he	does	not	attain
anything.	By	such	behavior	one	becomes	actually	transcendentally	situated.TEXT	26
म ा ं
	
च
	
य ो ऽ ᇼ य ि भ च ा र े ण
	
भ ि ᇧ त य ो ग े न
	
स े व त े
	
।
स
	
ग ु ण ा ᇳ स म त ी ᇰ य ै त ा ᇳ ब ् र ቊ भ ू य ा य
	
क ᇺ प त े
	
॥
२ ६
॥
māṁ	ca	yo	'vyabhicāreṇa
bhakti-yogena	sevate
sa	guṇān	samatītyaitān
brahma-bhūyāya	kalpate
mām—
unto	Me;	
ca—
also;	
yaḥ
—person;	
avyabhicāreṇa—
without	fail;
bhakti-yogena—
by	devotional	service;	
sevate
—renders	service;	
saḥ
—he;
guṇān—
all	the	modes	of	material	nature;	
samatītya—
transcending;	
etān—
all
this;	
brahma-bhūyāya—
to	be	elevated	on	the	Brahman	platform;	
kalpate—	
is
considered.
TRANSLATION
One	who	engages	in	full	devotional	service,	who	does	not	fall	down	in
any	circumstance,	at	once	transcends	the	modes	of	material	nature	and
thus	comes	to	the	level	of	Brahman.
PURPORT
This	verse	is	a	reply	to	Arjuna's	third	question:	What	is	the	means	of
attaining	to	the	transcendental	position?	As	explained	before,	the	material
world	is	acting	under	the	spell	of	the	modes	of	material	nature.	One	should	not
be	disturbed	by	the	activities	of	the	modes	of	nature;	instead	of	putting	his
consciousness	into	such	activities,	he	may	transfer	his	consciousness	to	Kṛṣṇa
activities.	Kṛṣṇa	activities	are	known	as	
bhakti-	yoga—
always	acting	for
Kṛṣṇa.	This	includes	not	only	Kṛṣṇa,	but	His	different	plenary	expansions
such	as	Rāma	and	Nārāyaṇa.	He	has	innumerable	expansions.	One	who	is
engaged	in	the	service	of	any	of	the	forms	of	Kṛṣṇa,	or	of	His	plenary
expansions,	is	considered	to	be	transcendentally	situated.	One	should	also	note
that	all	the	forms	of	Kṛṣṇa	are	fully	transcendental,	blissful,	full	of	knowledge
and	eternal.	Such	personalities	of	Godhead	are	omnipotent	and	omniscient,
and	they	possess	all	transcendental	qualities.	So,	if	one	engages	himself	in	theservice	of	Kṛṣṇa	or	His	plenary	expansions	with	unfailing	determination,
although	these	modes	of	material	nature	are	very	difficult	to	overcome,	he	can
overcome	them	easily.	This	is	already	explained	in	the	Seventh	Chapter.	One
who	surrenders	unto	Kṛṣṇa	at	once	surmounts	the	influence	of	the	modes	of
material	nature.	To	be	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	or	in	devotional	service	means
to	acquire	the	equality	of	Kṛṣṇa.	The	Lord	says	that	His	nature	is	eternal,
blissful	and	full	of	knowledge,	and	the	living	entities	are	part	and	parcel	of	the
Supreme,	as	gold	particles	are	part	of	a	gold	mine.	Thus	the	living	entity's
spiritual	position	is	as	good	as	gold,	as	good	as	Kṛṣṇa	in	quality.	The
difference	of	individuality	continues,	otherwise	there	is	no	question	of	
bhakti-
yoga.	Bhakti-yoga	
means	that	the	Lord	is	there,	the	devotee	is	there	and	the
activity	of	exchange	of	love	between	the	Lord	and	the	devotee	is	there.
Therefore	the	individuality	of	two	persons	is	present	in	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead	and	the	individual	person,	otherwise	there	is	no
meaning	to	
bhakti-yoga.	
If	one	is	not	situated	in	the	same	transcendental
position	with	the	Lord,	one	cannot	serve	the	Supreme	Lord.	To	be	a	personal
assistant	to	a	king,	one	must	acquire	the	qualifications.	Thus	the	qualification
is	to	become	Brahman,	or	freed	from	all	material	contamination.	It	is	said	in
the	Vedic	literature:	
brahmaiva	san	brahmāpyeti.	
One	can	attain	the	Supreme
Brahman	by	becoming	Brahman.	This	means	that	one	must	qualitatively
become	one	with	Brahman.	By	attainment	of	Brahman,	one	does	not	lose	his
eternal	Brahman	identity	as	individual	soul.
TEXT	27
ब ् र ቊ ण ो
	
ि ह
	
प ् र ि त ᇾ ठ ा ह म म ृ त ᇿ य ा ᇼ य य ᇿ य
	
च
	
।
श ा ᇽ व त ᇿ य
	
च
	
ध म ᆼ ᇿ य
	
स ु ख ᇿ य ै क ा ि ᇳ त क ᇿ य
	
च
	
॥
२ ७
॥
brahmaṇo	hi	pratiṣṭhāham
amṛtasyāvyayasya	ca
śāśvatasya	ca	dharmasya
sukhasyaikāntikasya	ca
brahmaṇaḥ—
of	the	impersonal	
brahmajyoti;	hi—
certainly;	
pratiṣṭhā
—the
rest;	
aham—
I	am;	
amṛtasya—
of	the	imperishable;	
avyayasya—
immortal;	
ca
—
also;	
śāśvatasya—
of	eternal;	
ca—
and;	
dharmasya—
of	the	constitutional
position;	
sukhasya—
happiness;	
aikāntikasya—
ultimate;	
ca—
also.TRANSLATION
And	I	am	the	basis	of	the	impersonal	Brahman,	which	is	the
constitutional	position	of	ultimate	happiness,	and	which	is	immortal,
imperishable	and	eternal.
PURPORT
The	constitution	of	Brahman	is	immortality,	imperishability,	eternity,	and
happiness.	Brahman	is	the	beginning	of	transcendental	realization.
Paramātmā,	the	Supersoul,	is	the	middle,	the	second	stage	in	transcendental
realization,	and	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is	the	ultimate	realization
of	the	Absolute	Truth.	Therefore,	both	Paramātmā	and	the	impersonal
Brahman	are	within	the	Supreme	Person.	It	is	explained	in	the	Seventh
Chapter	that	material	nature	is	the	manifestation	of	the	inferior	energy	of	the
Supreme	Lord.	The	Lord	impregnates	the	inferior	material	nature	with	the
fragments	of	the	superior	nature,	and	that	is	the	spiritual	touch	in	the	material
nature.	When	a	living	entity	conditioned	by	this	material	nature	begins	the
cultivation	of	spiritual	knowledge,	he	elevates	himself	from	the	position	of
material	existence	and	gradually	rises	up	to	the	Brahman	conception	of	the
Supreme.	This	attainment	of	the	Brahman	conception	of	life	is	the	first	stage
in	self-realization.	At	this	stage	the	Brahman	realized	person	is	transcendental
to	the	material	position,	but	he	is	not	actually	perfect	in	Brahman	realization.
If	he	wants,	he	can	continue	to	stay	in	the	Brahman	position	and	then
gradually	rise	up	to	Paramātmā	realization	and	then	to	the	realization	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	There	are	many	examples	of	this	in	Vedic
literature.	The	four	Kumāras	were	situated	first	in	the	impersonal	Brahman
conception	of	truth,	but	then	they	gradually	rose	to	the	platform	of	devotional
service.	One	who	cannot	elevate	himself	beyond	the	impersonal	conception	of
Brahman	runs	the	risk	of	falling	down.	In	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
it	is	stated	that
although	a	person	may	rise	to	the	stage	of	impersonal	Brahman,	without	going
farther,	with	no	information	of	the	Supreme	Person,	his	intelligence	is	not
perfectly	clear.	Therefore,	in	spite	of	being	raised	to	the	Brahman	platform,
there	is	the	chance	of	falling	down	if	one	is	not	engaged	in	the	devotional
service	of	the	Lord.	In	the	Vedic	language	it	is	also	said:	
raso	vai	saḥ;	rasaṁ
hy	evāyaṁ	labdhvānandī	bhavati.	
"When	one	understands	the	Personality	of
God,	the	reservoir	of	pleasure,	Kṛṣṇa,	he	actually	becomes	transcendentallyblissful."	The	Supreme	Lord	is	full	in	six	opulences,	and	when	a	devotee
approaches	Him,	there	is	an	exchange	of	these	six	opulences.	The	servant	of
the	king	enjoys	on	an	almost	equal	level	with	the	king.	And	so,	eternal
happiness,	imperishable	happiness,	eternal	life	accompany	devotional	service.
Therefore,	realization	of	Brahman,	or	eternity,	or	imperishability	is	included	in
devotional	service.	This	is	already	possessed	by	a	person	who	is	engaged	in
devotional	service.
The	living	entity,	although	Brahman	by	nature,	has	the	desire	to	lord	it	over
the	material	world,	and	due	to	this	he	falls	down.	In	his	constitutional	position,
a	living	entity	is	above	the	three	modes	of	material	nature,	but	association
with	material	nature	entangles	him	in	the	different	modes	of	material	nature,
goodness,	passion	and	ignorance.	Due	to	the	association	of	these	three	modes,
his	desire	to	dominate	the	material	world	is	there.	By	engagement	in
devotional	service	in	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	he	is	immediately	situated	in
the	transcendental	position,	and	his	unlawful	desire	to	control	material	nature
is	removed.	Therefore	the	process	of	devotional	service	beginning	with
hearing,	chanting,	remembering
—
the	prescribed	nine	methods	for	realizing
devotional	service
—
should	be	practiced	in	the	association	of	devotees.
Gradually,	by	such	association,	by	the	influence	of	the	spiritual	master,	one's
material	desire	to	dominate	is	removed,	and	one	becomes	firmly	situated	in
the	Lord's	transcendental	loving	service.	This	method	is	prescribed	from	the
twenty-second	to	the	last	verse	of	this	chapter.	Devotional	service	to	the	Lord
is	very	simple:	one	should	always	engage	in	the	service	of	the	Lord,	should	eat
the	remnants	of	foodstuffs	offered	to	the	Deity,	smell	the	flowers	offered	to
the	lotus	feet	of	the	Lord,	see	the	places	where	the	Lord	had	His
transcendental	pastimes,	read	of	the	different	activities	of	the	Lord,	His
reciprocation	of	love	with	His	devotees,	chant	always	the	transcendental
vibration	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/	Hare	Rāma,	Hare
Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,	Hare	Hare,	and	observe	the	fasting	days	commemorating
the	appearances	and	disappearances	of	the	Lord	and	His	devotees.	By
following	such	a	process	one	becomes	completely	detached	from	all	material
activities.	One	who	can	thus	situate	himself	in	the	
brahmajyoti
	is	equal	to	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	in	quality.
Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	Fourteenth	Chapter	of	the
Śrīmad-Bhagavad-gītā
	in	the	matter	of	the	Three	Modes	of	Material	Nature.Chapter-15
CHAPTER	FIFTEEN
The	Yoga	of	the	Supreme	Person
TEXT	1
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
ऊ ᇲ व ᆼ म ू ल म ध ः श ा ख म ᇽ व ᇰ थ ं
	
प ् र ा ह ु र ᇼ य य म ्
	
।
छ ᇳ द ा ं ि स
	
य ᇿ य
	
प ण ा ᆼ ि न
	
य ᇿ त ं
	
व े द
	
स
	
व े द ि व त ्
	
॥
१
॥
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
ūrdhva-mūlam	adhaḥ-śākham
aśvatthaṁ	prāhur	avyayam
chandāṁsi	yasya	parṇāniyas	taṁ	veda	sa	veda-vit
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
—the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
ūrdhva-
mūlam
—with	roots	above;	
adhaḥ
—downwards;	
śākham
—branches;
aśvattham	
—banyan	tree;	
prāhuḥ
—said;	
avyayam
—eternal;	
chandāṁsi
—
Vedic	hymns;	
yasya
—of	which;	
parṇāni
—the	leaves;	
yaḥ
—anyone;	
tam
—
that;	
veda
—knows;	
saḥ
—he;	
veda-vit
—the	knower	of	the	Vedas.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	There	is	a	banyan	tree	which	has	its	roots
upward	and	its	branches	down	and	whose	leaves	are	the	Vedic	hymns.
One	who	knows	this	tree	is	the	knower	of	the	Vedas.
PURPORT
After	the	discussion	of	the	importance	of	
bhakti-yoga,	
one	may	question,
"What	about	the	
Vedas?
"	It	is	explained	in	this	chapter	that	the	purpose	of
Vedic	study	is	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa.	Therefore	one	who	is	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	who	is	engaged	in	devotional	service,	already	knows	the
Vedas.
The	entanglement	of	this	material	world	is	compared	here	to	a	banyan	tree.
For	one	who	is	engaged	in	fruitive	activities,	there	is	no	end	to	the	banyan
tree.	He	wanders	from	one	branch	to	another,	to	another,	to	another.	The	tree
of	this	material	world	has	no	end,	and	for	one	who	is	attached	to	this	tree,
there	is	no	possibility	of	liberation.	The	Vedic	hymns,	meant	for	elevating
oneself,	are	called	the	leaves	of	this	tree.	This	tree's	roots	grow	upward
because	they	begin	from	where	Brahmā	is	located,	the	topmost	planet	of	this
universe.	If	one	can	understand	this	indestructible	tree	of	illusion,	then	one
can	get	out	of	it.
This	process	of	extrication	should	be	understood.	In	the	previous	chapters	it
has	been	explained	that	there	are	many	processes	by	which	to	get	out	of	the
material	entanglement.	And,	up	to	the	Thirteenth	Chapter,	we	have	seen	that
devotional	service	to	the	Supreme	Lord	is	the	best	way.	Now,	the	basic
principle	of	devotional	service	is	detachment	from	material	activities	and
attachment	to	the	transcendental	service	of	the	Lord.	The	process	of	breaking
attachment	to	the	material	world	is	discussed	in	the	beginning	of	this	chapter.The	root	of	this	material	existence	grows	upward.	This	means	that	it	begins
from	the	total	material	substance,	from	the	topmost	planet	of	the	universe.
From	there,	the	whole	universe	is	expanded,	with	so	many	branches,
representing	the	various	planetary	systems.	The	fruits	represent	the	results	of
the	living	entities'	activities,	namely,	religion,	economic	development,	sense
gratification	and	liberation.
Now,	there	is	no	ready	experience	in	this	world	of	a	tree	situated	with	its
branches	down	and	its	roots	upward,	but	there	is	such	a	thing.	That	tree	can	be
found	beside	a	reservoir	of	water.	We	can	see	that	the	trees	on	the	bank	reflect
upon	the	water	with	their	branches	down	and	roots	up.	In	other	words,	the	tree
of	this	material	world	is	only	a	reflection	of	the	real	tree	of	the	spiritual	world.
This	reflection	of	the	spiritual	world	is	situated	on	desire,	just	as	the	tree's
reflection	is	situated	on	water.	Desire	is	the	cause	of	things'	being	situated	in
this	reflected	material	light.	One	who	wants	to	get	out	of	this	material
existence	must	know	this	tree	thoroughly	through	analytical	study.	Then	he
can	cut	off	his	relationship	with	it.
This	tree,	being	the	reflection	of	the	real	tree,	is	an	exact	replica.	Everything
is	there	in	the	spiritual	world.	The	impersonalists	take	Brahmā	to	be	the	root
of	this	material	tree,	and	from	the	root,	according	to	
sāṅkhya	
philosophy,
come	
prakṛti,	puruṣa,	
then	the	three	
guṇas,	
then	the	five	gross	elements
(pañca-mahābhūta),	
then	the	ten	senses	
(daśendriya),	
mind,	etc.	In	this	way
they	divide	up	the	whole	material	world.	If	Brahmā	is	the	center	of	all
manifestations,	then	this	material	world	is	a	manifestation	of	the	center	by	180
degrees,	and	the	other	180	degrees	constitute	the	spiritual	world.	The	material
world	is	the	perverted	reflection,	so	the	spiritual	world	must	have	the	same
variegatedness,	but	in	reality.	The	
prakṛti	
is	the	external	energy	of	the
Supreme	Lord,	and	the	
puruṣa	
is	the	Supreme	Lord	Himself,	and	that	is
explained	in	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
Since	this	manifestation	is	material,	it	is
temporary.	A	reflection	is	temporary,	for	it	is	sometimes	seen	and	sometimes
not	seen.	But	the	origin	from	whence	the	reflection	is	reflected	is	eternal.	The
material	reflection	of	the	real	tree	has	to	be	cut	off.	When	it	is	said	that	a
person	knows	the	
Vedas,	
it	is	assumed	that	he	knows	how	to	cut	off
attachment	to	this	material	world.	If	one	knows	that	process,	he	actually
knows	the	
Vedas.	
One	who	is	attracted	by	the	ritualistic	formulas	of	the	
Vedas
is	attracted	by	the	beautiful	green	leaves	of	the	tree.	He	does	not	exactly	know
the	purpose	of	the	
Vedas.	
The	purpose	of	the	
Vedas,	
as	disclosed	by	the
Personality	of	Godhead	Himself,	is	to	cut	down	this	reflected	tree	and	attain
the	real	tree	of	the	spiritual	world.TEXT	2
अ ध ᇽ च ो ᇲ व ᆾ
	
प ् र स ृ त ा ᇿ त ᇿ य
	
श ा ख ा
ग ु ण प ् र व ृ ሬ ा
	
ि व ष य प ् र व ा ल ा ः
	
।
अ ध ᇽ च
	
म ू ल ा ᇳ य न ु स ᇳ त त ा ि न
क म ा ᆼ न ु ब ᇳ ध ी ि न
	
म न ु ᇾ य ल ो क े
	
॥
२
॥
adhaś	cordhvaṁ	prasṛtās	tasya	śākhā
guṇa-pravṛddhā	viṣaya-pravālāḥ
adhaś	ca	mūlāny	anusantatāni
karmānubandhīni	manuṣya-loke
adhaḥ—
downward;	
ca—
and;	
ūrdhvam—
upward;	
prasṛtāḥ
—extended;
tasya	
—its;	
śākhāḥ—
branches;	
guṇa
—modes	of	material	nature;
	pravṛddhāḥ
—
developed;	
viṣaya—
sense	objects;	
pravālāḥ—
twigs;	
adhaḥ—
downward;	
ca
—
and;	
mūlāni—
roots;	
anusantatāni—
extended;	
karma—
according	to	work;
anubandhīni—
bound;	
manuṣya-loke—
in	the	world	of	human	society.
TRANSLATION
The	branches	of	this	tree	extend	downward	and	upward,	nourished	by
the	three	modes	of	material	nature.	The	twigs	are	the	objects	of	the
senses.	This	tree	also	has	roots	going	down,	and	these	are	bound	to	the
fruitive	actions	of	human	society.
PURPORT
The	description	of	the	banyan	tree	is	further	explained	here.	Its	branches	are
spread	in	all	directions.	In	the	lower	parts,	there	are	variegated	manifestations
of	living	entities,	such	as	human	beings,	animals,	horses,	cows,	dogs,	cats,	etc.
These	are	situated	on	the	lower	parts	of	the	branches,	whereas	on	the	upper
parts	are	higher	forms	of	living	entities:	the	demigods,	Gandharvas	(fairies),
and	many	other	higher	species	of	life.	As	a	tree	is	nourished	by	water,	so	this
tree	is	nourished	by	the	three	modes	of	material	nature.	Sometimes	we	find
that	a	tract	of	land	is	barren	for	want	of	sufficient	water,	and	sometimes	a	tract
is	very	green;	similarly,	where	the	modes	of	material	nature	are
proportionately	greater	in	quantity,	the	different	species	of	life	are	manifestedin	that	proportion.
The	twigs	of	the	tree	are	considered	to	be	the	sense	objects.	By
development	of	the	different	modes	of	nature,	we	develop	different	senses,
and,	by	the	senses,	we	enjoy	different	varieties	of	sense	objects.	The	source	of
the	senses—the	ears,	the	nose,	eyes,	etc.—is	considered	to	be	the	upper	twigs,
tuned	to	the	enjoyment	of	different	sense	objects.	The	leaves	are	sound,	form,
touch–the	sense	objects.	The	roots,	which	are	subsidiary,	are	the	by-products
of	different	varieties	of	suffering	and	sense	enjoyment.	Thus	we	develop
attachment	and	aversion.	The	tendencies	toward	piety	and	impiety	are
considered	to	be	the	secondary	roots,	spreading	in	all	directions.	The	real	root
is	from	Brahmaloka,	and	the	other	roots	are	in	the	human	planetary	systems.
After	one	enjoys	the	results	of	virtuous	activities	in	the	upper	planetary
systems,	he	comes	down	to	this	earth	and	renews	his	
karma	
or	fruitive
activities	for	promotion.	This	planet	of	human	beings	is	considered	the	field	of
activities.
TEXTS	3-4
न
	
ኅ प म ᇿ य े ह
	
त थ ो प ल ᇷ य त े
न ा ᇳ त ो
	
न
	
च ा ि द न ᆼ
	
च
	
स ᇸ प ् र ि त ᇾ ठ ा
	
।
अ ᇽ व ᇰ थ म े न ं
	
स ु ि व ኅ ढ म ू ल ं
-
अ स ङ ् ग श ᇿ त ् र े ण
	
द ृ ढ े न
	
ि छ ᇰ ᇰ व ा
	
॥
३
॥
त त ः
	
प द ं
	
त ᇰ प ि र म ा ि ग ᆼ त ᇼ य ं
य ि ᇿ म ᇳ ग त ा
	
न
	
ि न व त ᆼ ि ᇳ त
	
भ ू य ः
	
।
त म े व
	
च ा ሱ ं
	
प ु ኄ ष ं
	
प ् र प ሱ े
	
य त ः
	
प ् र व ृ ि ሧ ः
	
प ् र स ृ त ा
	
प ु र ा ण ी
	
॥
४
॥
na	rūpam	asyeha	tathopalabhyate
nānto	na	cādir	na	ca	sampratiṣṭhā
aśvattham	enaṁ	suvirūḍha-mūlam
asaṅga-śastreṇa	dṛḍhena	chittvā
tataḥ	padaṁ	tat	parimārgitavyaṁ
yasmin	gatā	na	nivartanti	bhūyaḥ
tam	eva	cādyaṁ	puruṣaṁ	prapadye
yataḥ	pravṛttiḥ	prasṛtā	purāṇī
na
—not;	
rūpam
—form;	
asya
—of	this	tree;	
iha
—in	this;	
tathā
—also;upalabhyate
—can	be	perceived;	
na
—never;	
antaḥ
—end;	
na
—never;	
ca
—
also;	
ādiḥ
—beginning;	
na
—never;	
ca
—also;	
sampratiṣṭhā
—the	foundation;
aśvattham
—banyan	tree;	
enam
—this;	
suvirūḍha
—strongly;	
mūlam
—rooted;
asaṅga-śastreṇa—
by	the	weapon	of	detachment;	
dṛḍhena
—strong;	
chittvā
—
by	cutting;	
tataḥ
—thereafter;	
padam
—situation;	
tat
—that;	
parimārgitavyam
—has	to	be	searched	out;	
yasmin
—where;	
gatāḥ
—going;	
na
—never;
nivartanti	
—comes	back;	
bhūyaḥ
—again;	
tam
—to	him;	
eva
—certainly;	
ca
—
also;	
ādyam
—	original;	
puruṣam
—the	Personality	of	Godhead;	
prapadye
—
surrender;	
yataḥ	
—from	whom;	
pravṛttiḥ
—beginning;	
prasṛtā
—extension;
purāṇī
—very	old.
TRANSLATION
The	real	form	of	this	tree	cannot	be	perceived	in	this	world.	No	one	can
understand	where	it	ends,	where	it	begins,	or	where	its	foundation	is.	But
with	determination	one	must	cut	down	this	tree	with	the	weapon	of
detachment.	So	doing,	one	must	seek	that	place	from	which,	having	once
gone,	one	never	returns,	and	there	surrender	to	that	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead	from	whom	everything	has	begun	and	in	whom	everything	is
abiding	since	time	immemorial.
PURPORT
It	is	now	clearly	stated	that	the	real	form	of	this	banyan	tree	cannot	be
understood	in	this	material	world.	Since	the	root	is	upwards,	the	extension	of
the	real	tree	is	at	the	other	end.	No	one	can	see	how	far	the	tree	extends,	nor
can	one	see	the	beginning	of	this	tree.	Yet	one	has	to	find	out	the	cause.	"I	am
the	son	of	my	father,	my	father	is	the	son	of	such	and	such	a	person,	etc."	By
searching	in	this	way,	one	comes	to	Brahmā,	who	is	generated	by	the
Garbhodakaśāyī	Viṣṇu.	Finally,	in	this	way,	when	one	reaches	to	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	that	is	the	end	of	research	work.	One	has	to	search
out	that	origin	of	this	tree,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	through	the
association	of	persons	who	are	in	the	knowledge	of	that	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead.	Then	by	understanding	one	becomes	gradually	detached	from
this	false	reflection	of	reality,	and	by	knowledge	one	can	cut	off	the
connection	and	actually	become	situated	in	the	real	tree.
The	word	
asaṅga
	is	very	important	in	this	connection	because	theattachment	for	sense	enjoyment	and	lording	it	over	the	material	nature	is	very
strong.	Therefore	one	must	learn	detachment	by	discussion	of	spiritual	science
based	on	authoritative	scriptures,	and	one	must	hear	from	persons	who	are
actually	in	knowledge.	As	a	result	of	such	discussion	in	the	association	of
devotees,	one	comes	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Then	the	first
thing	one	must	do	is	surrender	to	Him.	The	description	of	that	place	whence
going	no	one	returns	to	this	false	reflected	tree	is	given	here.	The	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	is	the	original	root	from	whom	everything	has
emanated.	To	gain	favor	of	that	Personality	of	Godhead,	one	has	only	to
surrender,	and	this	is	a	result	of	performing	devotional	service	by	hearing,
chanting,	etc.	He	is	the	cause	of	this	extension	of	this	material	world.	This	is
already	explained	by	the	Lord	Himself:	
ahaṁ	sarvasya	prabhavaḥ.	
"I	am	the
origin	of	everything."
Therefore	to	get	out	of	the	entanglement	of	this	strong	banyan	tree	of
material	life,	one	must	surrender	to	Kṛṣṇa.	As	soon	as	one	surrenders	unto
Kṛṣṇa,	he	becomes	detached	automatically	from	this	material	extension.
TEXT	5
ि न म ा ᆼ न म ो ह ा
	
ि ज त स ङ ् ग द ो ष ा
	
अ ᇲ य ा ᇰ म ि न ᇰ य ा
	
ि व ि न व ृ ሧ क ा म ा ः
	
।
ሲ ᇳ ሲ ै ि व ᆼ म ु ᇧ त ा ः
	
स ु ख द ु ः ख स ं ᇥ ै र ्
-
ग ᇫ छ ᇳ ᇰ य म ू ढ ा ः
	
प द म ᇼ य य ं
	
त त ्
	
॥
५
॥
nirmāna-mohā	jita-saṅga-doṣā
adhyātma-nityā	vinivṛtta-kāmāḥ
dvandvair	vimuktāḥ	sukha-duḥkha-saṁjñair
gacchanty	amūḍhāḥ	padam	avyayaṁ	tat
nir—
without;	
māna—
respect;	
mohāḥ—
illusion;	
jita—
having	conquered;
saṅga—
association;	
doṣāḥ—
faulty;	
adhyātma—
spiritual;	
nityāḥ—
eternity;
vinivṛtta—
associated;	
kāmāḥ—
lusts;	
dvandvaiḥ—
with	duality;	
vimuktāḥ—
liberated;	
sukha-duḥkha—
happiness	and	distress;	
saṁjñaiḥ—
named;
gacchanti—
attains;	
amūḍhāḥ—
unbewildered;	
padam—
situation;	
avyayam—
eternal;	
tat—
that.
TRANSLATIONOne	who	is	free	from	illusion,	false	prestige,	and	false	association,	who
understands	the	eternal,	who	is	done	with	material	lust	and	is	freed	from
the	duality	of	happiness	and	distress,	and	who	knows	how	to	surrender
unto	the	Supreme	Person,	attains	to	that	eternal	kingdom.
PURPORT
The	surrendering	process	is	described	here	very	nicely.	The	first
qualification	is	that	one	should	not	be	deluded	by	pride.	Because	the
conditioned	soul	is	puffed	up,	thinking	himself	the	lord	of	material	nature,	it	is
very	difficult	for	him	to	surrender	unto	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.
One	should	know	by	the	cultivation	of	real	knowledge	that	he	is	not	lord	of
material	nature;	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is	the	Lord.	When	one	is
free	from	delusion	caused	by	pride,	he	can	begin	the	process	of	surrender.	For
one	who	is	always	expecting	some	honor	in	this	material	world,	it	is	not
possible	to	surrender	to	the	Supreme	Person.	Pride	is	due	to	illusion,	for
although	one	comes	here,	stays	for	a	brief	time	and	then	goes	away,	he	has	the
foolish	notion	that	he	is	the	lord	of	the	world.	He	thus	makes	all	things
complicated,	and	he	is	always	in	trouble.	The	whole	world	moves	under	this
impression.	People	are	considering	that	the	land,	this	earth,	belongs	to	human
society,	and	they	have	divided	the	land	under	the	false	impression	that	they	are
the	proprietors.	One	has	to	get	out	of	this	false	notion	that	human	society	is
the	proprietor	of	this	world.	When	one	is	freed	from	such	a	false	notion,	he
becomes	free	from	all	the	false	associations	caused	by	familial,	social,	and
national	affections.	These	fake	associations	bind	one	to	this	material	world.
After	this	stage,	one	has	to	develop	spiritual	knowledge.	One	has	to	cultivate
knowledge	of	what	is	actually	his	own	and	what	is	actually	not	his	own.	And,
when	one	has	an	understanding	of	things	as	they	are,	he	becomes	free	from	all
dual	conceptions	such	as	happiness	and	distress,	pleasure	and	pain.	He
becomes	full	in	knowledge;	then	it	is	possible	for	him	to	surrender	to	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.
TEXT	6
न
	
त द ् भ ा स य त े
	
स ू य ो ᆼ
	
न
	
श श ा ङ ् क ो
	
न
	
प ा व क ः
	
।
य द ् ग ᇰ व ा
	
न
	
ि न व त ᆼ ᇳ त े
	
त ሬ ा म
	
प र म ं
	
म म
	
॥
६
॥na	tad	bhāsayate	sūryo
na	śaśāṅko	na	pāvakaḥ
yad	gatvā	na	nivartante
tad	dhāma	paramaṁ	mama
na—
not;	
tat
—that;	
bhāsayate—
illuminates;	
sūryaḥ
—sun;	
na
—nor;
śaśāṅkaḥ
—the	moon;	
na
—nor;	
pāvakaḥ
—fire,	electricity;	
yat
—where;	
gatvā
—going;	
na
—never;	
nivartante—
comes	back;	
tat
	
dhāma—
that	abode;
paramam
—supreme;	
mama
—My.
TRANSLATION
That	abode	of	Mine	is	not	illumined	by	the	sun	or	moon,	nor	by
electricity.	One	who	reaches	it	never	returns	to	this	material	world.
PURPORT
The	spiritual	world,	the	abode	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
Kṛṣṇa—which	is	known	as	Kṛṣṇaloka,	Goloka	Vṛndāvana—is	described	here.
In	the	spiritual	sky	there	is	no	need	of	sunshine,	moonshine,	fire	or	electricity,
because	all	the	planets	are	self-luminous.	We	have	only	one	planet	in	this
universe,	the	sun,	which	is	self-luminous,	but	all	the	planets	in	the	spiritual
sky	are	self-luminous.	The	shining	effulgence	of	all	those	planets	(called
Vaikuṇṭhas)	constitutes	the	shining	sky	known	as	the	
brahmajyoti.	
Actually,
the	effulgence	is	emanating	from	the	planet	of	Kṛṣṇa,	Goloka	Vṛndāvana.	Part
of	that	shining	effulgence	is	covered	by	the	
mahat-tattva,	
the	material	world.
Other	than	this,	the	major	portion	of	that	shining	sky	is	full	of	spiritual
planets,	which	are	called	Vaikuṇṭhas,	chief	of	which	is	Goloka	Vṛndāvana.
As	long	as	a	living	entity	is	in	this	dark	material	world,	he	is	in	conditional
life,	but	as	soon	as	he	reaches	the	spiritual	sky,	by	cutting	through	the	false,
perverted	tree	of	this	material	world,	he	becomes	liberated.	Then	there	is	no
chance	of	his	coming	back	here.	In	his	conditional	life,	the	living	entity
considers	himself	to	be	the	lord	of	this	material	world,	but	in	his	liberated	state
he	enters	into	the	spiritual	kingdom	and	becomes	the	associate	of	the	Supreme
Lord.	There	he	enjoys	eternal	bliss,	eternal	life,	and	full	knowledge.
One	should	be	captivated	by	this	information.	He	should	desire	to	transfer
himself	to	that	eternal	world	and	extricate	himself	from	this	false	reflection	ofreality.	For	one	who	is	too	much	attached	to	this	material	world,	it	is	very
difficult	to	cut	that	attachment,	but	if	he	takes	to	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	there	is
a	chance	of	gradually	becoming	detached.	One	has	to	associate	himself	with
devotees,	those	who	are	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	One	should	search	out	a
society	dedicated	to	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	learn	how	to	discharge
devotional	service.	In	this	way	he	can	cut	off	his	attachment	to	the	material
world.	One	cannot	become	detached	from	the	attraction	of	the	material	world
simply	by	dressing	himself	in	saffron	cloth.	He	must	become	attached	to	the
devotional	service	of	the	Lord.	Therefore	one	should	take	it	very	seriously	that
devotional	service	as	described	in	the	Twelfth	Chapter	is	the	only	way	to	get
out	of	this	false	representation	of	the	real	tree.	In	Chapter	Fourteen	the
contamination	of	all	kinds	of	processes	by	material	nature	is	described.	Only
devotional	service	is	described	as	purely	transcendental.
The	words	
paramaṁ	mama
	are	very	important	here.	Actually	every	nook
and	corner	is	the	property	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	but	the	spiritual	world	is
paramam,	
full	of	six	opulences.	In	the	
Upaniṣads	
it	is	also	confirmed	that	in
the	spiritual	world	there	is	no	need	of	sunshine	or	moonshine,	for	the	whole
spiritual	sky	is	illuminated	by	the	internal	potency	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	That
supreme	abode	can	be	achieved	only	by	surrender	and	by	no	other	means.
TEXT	7
म म ै व ा ं श ो
	
ज ी व ल ो क े
	
ज ी व भ ू त ः
	
स न ा त न ः
	
।
म न ः ष ᇾ ठ ा न ी ि ᇳ द ् र य ा ि ण
	
प ् र क ृ ि त ᇿ थ ा ि न
	
क ष ᆼ ि त
	
॥
७
॥
mamaivāṁśo	jīva-loke
jīva-bhūtaḥ	sanātanaḥ
manaḥ	ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi
prakṛti-sthāni	karṣati
mama—
My;
	eva—
certainly;	
aṁśaḥ—
fragmental	particles;	
jīva-loke—	
world
of	conditional	life;	
jīva-bhūtaḥ—
the	conditioned	living	entities;	
sanātanaḥ
—
eternal;	
manaḥ—
mind;	
ṣaṣṭhāni—
six;
	indriyāṇi—
senses;	
prakṛti—	
material
nature;	
sthāni—
situated;	
karṣati—
struggling	hard.
TRANSLATIONThe	living	entities	in	this	conditioned	world	are	My	eternal,	fragmental
parts.	Due	to	conditioned	life,	they	are	struggling	very	hard	with	the	six
senses,	which	include	the	mind.
PURPORT
In	this	verse	the	identity	of	the	living	being	is	clearly	given.	The	living
entity	is	the	fragmental	part	and	parcel	of	the	Supreme	Lord
—
eternally.	It	is
not	that	he	assumes	individuality	in	his	conditional	life	and	in	his	liberated
state	becomes	one	with	the	Supreme	Lord.	He	is	eternally	fragmented.	It	is
clearly	said,	
sanātanaḥ.	
According	to	the	Vedic	version,	the	Supreme	Lord
manifests	and	expands	Himself	in	innumerable	expansions,	of	which	the
primary	expansions	are	called	
Viṣṇu-tattva,	
and	the	secondary	expansions	are
called	the	living	entities.	In	other	words,	the	
Viṣṇu-tattva
	is	the	personal
expansion,	and	the	living	entities	are	separated	expansions.	By	His	personal
expansion,	He	is	manifested	in	various	forms	like	Lord	Rāma,	Nṛsiṁhadeva,
Viṣṇumūrti	and	all	the	predominating	Deities	in	the	Vaikuṇṭha	planets.	The
separated	expansions,	the	living	entities,	are	eternally	servitors.	The	personal
expansions	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	the	individual	identities	of
the	Godhead,	are	always	present.	Similarly,	the	separated	expansions	of	living
entities	have	their	identities.	As	fragmental	parts	and	parcels	of	the	Supreme
Lord,	the	living	entities	have	also	fragmental	qualities,	of	which	independence
is	one.	Every	living	entity	has	an	individual	soul,	his	personal	individuality
and	a	minute	form	of	independence.	By	misuse	of	that	independence,	one
becomes	a	conditioned	soul,	and	by	proper	use	of	independence	he	is	always
liberated.	In	either	case,	he	is	qualititatively	eternal,	as	the	Supreme	Lord	is.	In
his	liberated	state	he	is	freed	from	this	material	condition,	and	he	is	under	the
engagement	of	transcendental	service	unto	the	Lord;	in	his	conditioned	life	he
is	dominated	by	the	material	modes	of	nature,	and	he	forgets	the
transcendental	loving	service	of	the	Lord.	As	a	result,	he	has	to	struggle	very
hard	to	maintain	his	existence	in	the	material	world.
The	living	entities,	not	only	the	human	beings	and	the	cats	and	dogs,	but
even	the	greater	controllers	of	the	material	world–Brahmā,	Lord	Śiva,	and
even	Viṣṇu–are	all	parts	and	parcels	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	They	are	all	eternal,
not	temporary	manifestations.	The	word	
karṣati	
(struggling	or	grappling	hard)
is	very	significant.	The	conditioned	soul	is	bound	up,	as	though	shackled	by
iron	chains.	He	is	bound	up	by	the	false	ego,	and	the	mind	is	the	chief	agent
which	is	driving	him	in	this	material	existence.	When	the	mind	is	in	the	modeof	goodness,	his	activities	are	good;	when	the	mind	is	in	the	mode	of	passion,
his	activities	are	troublesome;	and	when	the	mind	is	in	the	mode	of	ignorance,
he	travels	in	the	lower	species	of	life.	It	is	clear,	however,	in	this	verse,	that
the	conditioned	soul	is	covered	by	the	material	body,	with	the	mind	and	the
senses,	and	when	he	is	liberated	this	material	covering	perishes,	but	his
spiritual	body	manifests	in	its	individual	capacity.	The	following	information
is	there	in	the	
Mādhyandi-nāyana-śruti:	sa	vā	eṣa	brahma-niṣṭha	idaṁ
śarīraṁ	marttyam	atisṛjya	brahmābhisampadya	brahmaṇā	paśyati	brahmaṇā
śṛṇoti	brahmaṇaivedaṁ	sarvam	anubhavati.	
It	is	stated	here	that	when	a
living	entity	gives	up	this	material	embodiment	and	enters	into	the	spiritual
world,	he	revives	his	spiritual	body,	and	in	his	spiritual	body	he	can	see	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	face	to	face.	He	can	hear	and	speak	to	Him
face	to	face,	and	he	can	understand	the	Supreme	Personality	as	He	is.	In	
smṛti
also	it	is	understood	that	in	the	spiritual	planets	everyone	lives	in	bodies
featured	like	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead's.	As	far	as	bodily
construction	is	concerned,	there	is	no	difference	between	the	part	and	parcel
living	entities	and	the	expansions	of	
Viṣṇumūrti.	
In	other	words,	at	liberation
the	living	entity	gets	a	spiritual	body	by	the	grace	of	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead.
The	word	
mamaivāṁśaḥ
	(fragmental	parts	and	parcels	of	the	Supreme
Lord)	is	also	very	significant.	The	fragmental	portion	of	the	Supreme	Lord	is
not	like	some	material	broken	part.	We	have	already	understood	in	the	Second
Chapter	that	the	spirit	cannot	be	cut	into	pieces.	This	fragment	is	not
materially	conceived.	It	is	not	like	matter	which	can	be	cut	into	pieces	and
joined	together	again.	That	conception	is	not	applicable	here	because	the
Sanskrit	word	
sanātana
	(eternal)	is	used.	The	fragmental	portion	is	eternal.	It
is	also	stated	in	the	beginning	of	the	Second	Chapter	that	
(dehino'smin	yathā
)
in	each	and	every	individual	body,	the	fragmental	portion	of	the	Supreme	Lord
is	present.	That	fragmental	portion,	when	liberated	from	the	bodily
entanglement,	revives	its	original	spiritual	body	in	the	spiritual	sky	in	a
spiritual	planet	and	enjoys	association	with	the	Supreme	Lord.	It	is,	however,
understood	here	that	the	living	entity,	being	the	fragmental	part	and	parcel	of
the	Supreme	Lord,	is	qualitatively	one,	just	as	the	parts	and	parcels	of	gold	are
also	gold.
TEXT	8
श र ी र ं
	
य द व ा ᇴ न ो ि त
	
य ᇫ च ा ᇴ य ु ᇰ क ् र ा म त ी ᇽ व र ः
	
।ग ृ ह ी ᇰ व ै त ा ि न
	
स ं य ा ि त
	
व ा य ु ग ᆼ ᇳ ध ा ि न व ा श य ा त ्
	
॥
८
॥
śarīraṁ	yad	avāpnoti
yac	cāpy	utkrāmatīśvaraḥ
gṛhītvaitāni	saṁyāti
vāyur	gandhān	ivāśayāt
śarīram
—body;	
yat
—as	much	as;	
avāpnoti—
gets;	
yat—
that	which;	
ca—
also;	
api—
virtually;	
utkrāmati—
gives	up;	
īśvaraḥ
—the	lord	of	the	body;
gṛhītvā
—taking;	
etāni
—all	these;	
saṁyāti
—goes	away;	
vāyuḥ
—air;	
gandhān
—	smell;	
iva
—like;	
āśayāt
—from	the	flower.
TRANSLATION
The	living	entity	in	the	material	world	carries	his	different	conceptions
of	life	from	one	body	to	another	as	the	air	carries	aromas.
PURPORT
Here	the	living	entity	is	described	as	
īśvara,	
the	controller	of	his	own	body.
If	he	likes,	he	can	change	his	body	to	a	higher	grade,	and	if	he	likes	he	can
move	to	a	lower	class.	Minute	independence	is	there.	The	change	his	body
undergoes	depends	upon	him.	At	the	time	of	death,	the	consciousness	he	has
created	will	carry	him	on	to	the	next	type	of	body.	If	he	has	made	his
consciousness	like	that	of	a	cat	or	dog,	he	is	sure	to	change	to	a	cat's	or	dog's
body.	And,	if	he	has	fixed	his	consciousness	on	godly	qualities,	he	will	change
into	the	form	of	a	demigod.	And,	if	he	is	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	he	will	be
transferred	to	Kṛṣṇaloka	in	the	spiritual	world	and	will	associate	with	Kṛṣṇa.	It
is	a	false	claim	that	after	the	annihilation	of	this	body	everything	is	finished.
The	individual	soul	is	transmigrating	from	one	body	to	another,	and	his
present	body	and	present	activities	are	the	background	of	his	next	body.	One
gets	a	different	body	according	to	
karma,	
and	he	has	to	quit	this	body	in	due
course.	It	is	stated	here	that	the	subtle	body,	which	carries	the	conception	of
the	next	body,	develops	another	body	in	the	next	life.	This	process	of
transmigrating	from	one	body	to	another	and	struggling	while	in	the	body	is
called	
karṣati	
or	struggle	for	existence.TEXT	9
श ् र ो त ् र ं
	
च ᇤ ु ः
	
ᇿ प श ᆼ न ं
	
च
	
र स न ं
	
घ ् र ा ण म े व
	
च
	
।
अ ि ध ᇾ ठ ा य
	
म न ᇽ च ा य ं
	
ि व ष य ा न ु प स े व त े
	
॥
९
॥
śrotraṁ	cakṣuḥ	sparśanaṁ	ca
rasanaṁ	ghrāṇam	eva	ca
adhiṣṭhāya	manaś	cāyaṁ
viṣayān	upasevate
śrotram
—ears;	
cakṣuḥ—
eyes;	
sparśanam—
touch;	
ca—
also;	
rasanam—
tongue;	
ghrāṇam—
smelling	power;	
eva—
also;	
ca—
and;	
adhiṣṭhāya—
being
situated;	
manaḥ—
mind;	
ca—
also;	
ayam—
this;	
viṣayān—
sense	objects;
upasevate—
enjoys.
TRANSLATION
The	living	entity,	thus	taking	another	gross	body,	obtains	a	certain	type
of	ear,	tongue,	and	nose	and	sense	of	touch,	which	are	grouped	about	the
mind.	He	thus	enjoys	a	particular	set	of	sense	objects.
PURPORT
In	other	words,	if	the	living	entity	adulterates	his	consciousness	with	the
qualities	of	cats	and	dogs,	in	his	next	life	he	gets	a	cat	or	dog	body	and	enjoys.
Consciousness	is	originally	pure,	like	water.	But	if	we	mix	water	with	a
certain	color,	it	changes.	Similarly,	consciousness	is	pure,	for	the	spirit	soul	is
pure.	But	consciousness	is	changed	according	to	the	association	of	the
material	qualities.	Real	consciousness	is	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	When,
therefore,	one	is	situated	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	he	is	in	his	pure	life.	But	if
his	consciousness	is	adulterated	by	some	type	of	material	mentality,	in	the
next	life	he	gets	a	corresponding	body.	He	does	not	necessarily	get	a	human
body	again;	he	can	get	the	body	of	a	cat,	dog,	hog,	demigod	or	one	of	many
other	forms,	for	there	are	8,400,000	species.
TEXT	10उ ᇰ क ् र ा म ᇳ त ं
	
ि ᇿ थ त ं
	
व ा ि प
	
भ ु ᇮ ज ा न ं
	
व ा
	
ग ु ण ा ि ᇳ व त म ्
	
।
ि व म ू ढ ा
	
न ा न ु प ᇽ य ि ᇳ त
	
प ᇽ य ि ᇳ त
	
ᇥ ा न च ᇤ ु ष ः
	
॥
१ ०
॥
utkrāmantaṁ	sthitaṁ	vāpi
bhuñjānaṁ	vā	guṇānvitam
vimūḍhā	nānupaśyanti
paśyanti	jñāna-cakṣuṣaḥ
utkrāmantam
—quitting	the	body;	
sthitam—
situated	in	the	body;	
vāpi—
either;	
bhuñjānam—
enjoying;	
vā
—or;	
guṇa-anvitam—
under	the	spell	of	the
modes	of	material	nature;	
vimūḍhāḥ—
foolish	persons;	
na—
never;	
anupaśyanti
—
can	see;	
paśyanti—
one	can	see;	
jñāna-cakṣuṣaḥ—
one	who	has	the	eyes	of
knowledge.
TRANSLATION
The	foolish	cannot	understand	how	a	living	entity	can	quit	his	body,
nor	can	they	understand	what	sort	of	body	he	enjoys	under	the	spell	of
the	modes	of	nature.	But	one	whose	eyes	are	trained	in	knowledge	can	see
all	this.
PURPORT
The	word	
jñāna-cakṣuṣaḥ
	is	very	significant.	Without	knowledge,	one
cannot	understand	how	a	living	entity	leaves	his	present	body,	nor	what	form
of	body	he	is	going	to	take	in	the	next	life,	nor	even	why	he	is	living	in	a
particular	type	of	body.	This	requires	a	great	amount	of	knowledge	understood
from	
Bhagavad-gītā	
and	similar	literatures	heard	from	a	bona	fide	spiritual
master.	One	who	is	trained	to	perceive	all	these	things	is	fortunate.	Every
living	entity	is	quitting	his	body	under	certain	circumstances;he	is	living	under
certain	circumstances	and	enjoying	under	certain	circumstances	under	the
spell	of	material	nature.	As	a	result,	he	is	suffering	different	kinds	of
happiness	and	distress,	under	the	illusion	of	sense	enjoyment.	Persons	who	are
everlastingly	fooled	by	lust	and	desire	lose	all	power	of	understanding	their
change	of	body	and	their	stay	in	a	particular	body.	They	cannot	comprehend	it.
Those	who	have	developed	spiritual	knowledge,	however,	can	see	that	the
spirit	is	different	from	the	body	and	is	changing	its	body	and	enjoying	indifferent	ways.	A	person	in	such	knowledge	can	understand	how	the
conditioned	living	entity	is	suffering	in	this	material	existence.	Therefore
those	who	are	highly	developed	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	try	their	best	to	give
this	knowledge	to	the	people	in	general,	for	their	conditional	life	is	very	much
troublesome.	They	should	come	out	of	it	and	be	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	and	liberate
themselves	to	transfer	to	the	spiritual	world.
TEXT	11
य त ᇳ त ो
	
य ो ि ग न ᇽ च ै न ं
	
प ᇽ य ᇳ ᇰ य ा ᇰ म ᇳ य व ि ᇿ थ त म ्
	
।
य त ᇳ त ो ऽ ᇴ य क ृ त ा ᇰ म ा न ो
	
न ै न ं
	
प ᇽ य ᇳ ᇰ य च े त स ः
	
॥
१ १
॥
yatanto	yoginaś	cainaṁ
paśyanty	ātmany	avasthitam
yatanto	'py	akṛtātmāno
nainaṁ	paśyanty	acetasaḥ
yatantaḥ—
endeavoring;	
yoginaḥ
—transcendentalists;	
ca—
also;	
enam
—
this;	
paśyanti—
can	see;	
ātmani—
in	the	self;	
avasthitam—
situated;	
yatantaḥ
—
although	endeavoring;	
api—
although;	
akṛta-ātmānaḥ—
without	self-
realization;	
na
—does	not;	
enam
—this;	
paśyanti
—can	see;	
acetasaḥ
—
undeveloped	mind.
TRANSLATION
The	endeavoring	transcendentalist,	who	is	situated	in	self-realization,
can	see	all	this	clearly.	But	those	who	are	not	situated	in	self-realization
cannot	see	what	is	taking	place,	though	they	may	try	to.
PURPORT
There	are	many	transcendentalists	in	the	path	of	spiritual	self-realization,
but	one	who	is	not	situated	in	self-realization	cannot	see	how	things	are
changing	in	the	body	of	the	living	entity.	The	word	
yoginaḥ
	is	significant	in
this	connection.	In	the	present	day	there	are	many	so-called	
yogīs,	
and	there
are	many	so-called	associations	of	
yogīs,	
but	they	are	actually	blind	in	thematter	of	self-realization.	They	are	simply	addicted	to	some	sort	of	gymnastic
exercise	and	are	satisfied	if	the	body	is	well-built	and	healthy.	They	have	no
other	information.	They	are	called	
yatanto'py	akṛtātmānaḥ.	
Even	though	they
are	endeavoring	in	a	so-called	
yoga	
system,	they	are	not	self-realized.	Such
people	cannot	understand	the	process	of	the	transmigration	of	the	soul.	Only
those	who	are	actually	in	the	
yoga	
system	and	have	realized	the	self,	the
world,	and	the	Supreme	Lord,	in	other	words,	the	
bhakti-yogīs,	
those	engaged
in	pure	devotional	service	in	Krsṇa	consciousness,	can	understand	how	things
are	taking	place.
TEXT	12
य द ा ि द ᇰ य ग त ं
	
त े ज ो
	
ज ग द ् भ ा स य त े ऽ ि ख ल म ्
	
।
य ᇫ च ᇳ द ् र म ि स
	
य ᇫ च ा ᇩ न ौ
	
त ሧ े ज ो
	
ि व द ् ि ध
	
म ा म क म ्
	
॥
१ २
॥
yad	āditya-gataṁ	tejo
jagad	bhāsayate	'khilam
yac	candramasi	yac	cāgnau
tat	tejo	viddhi	māmakam
yat—
that	which;	
āditya-gatam—
in	the	sunshine;	
tejaḥ—
splendor;	
jagat—
the	whole	world;	
bhāsayate—
illuminates;	
akhilam—
entirely;	
yat—
that	which;
candramasi—
in	the	moon;	
yat—
that	which;	
ca—
also;	
agnau—
in	the	fire;	
tat
—
that;	
tejaḥ—
splendor;	
viddhi—
understand;	
māmakam—
from	Me.
TRANSLATION
The	splendor	of	the	sun,	which	dissipates	the	darkness	of	this	whole
world,	comes	from	Me.	And	the	splendor	of	the	moon	and	the	splendor	of
fire	are	also	from	Me.
PURPORT
The	unintelligent	cannot	understand	how	things	are	taking	place.	The
beginning	of	knowledge	can	be	established	by	understanding	what	the	Lord
explains	here.	Everyone	sees	the	sun,	moon,	fire	and	electricity.	One	shouldsimply	try	to	understand	that	the	splendor	of	the	sun,	the	splendor	of	the
moon,	and	the	splendor	of	electricity	or	fire	are	coming	from	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.	In	such	a	conception	of	life,	the	beginning	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	lies	a	great	deal	of	advancement	for	the	conditioned	soul	in	this
material	world.	The	living	entities	are	essentially	the	parts	and	parcels	of	the
Supreme	Lord,	and	He	is	giving	herewith	the	hint	how	they	can	come	back	to
Godhead,	back	to	home.	From	this	verse	we	can	understand	that	the	sun	is
illuminating	the	whole	solar	system.	There	are	different	universes	and	solar
systems,	and	there	are	different	suns,	moons	and	planets	also.	Sunlight	is	due
to	the	spiritual	effulgence	in	the	spiritual	sky	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	With	the
rise	of	the	sun,	the	activities	of	human	beings	are	set	up.	They	set	fire	to
prepare	their	foodstuff;	they	set	fire	to	start	the	factories,	etc.	So	many	things
are	done	with	the	help	of	fire.	Therefore	sunrise,	fire	and	moonlight	are	so
pleasing	to	the	living	entities.	Without	their	help	no	living	entity	can	live.	So	if
one	can	understand	that	the	light	and	splendor	of	the	sun,	moon	and	fire	are
emanating	from	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	then	one's	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	will	begin.	By	the	moonshine,	all	the	vegetables	are	nourished.
The	moonshine	is	so	pleasing	that	people	can	easily	understand	that	they	are
living	by	the	mercy	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	Kṛṣṇa.	Without
His	mercy	there	cannot	be	sun,	without	His	mercy	there	cannot	be	moon,	and
without	His	mercy	there	cannot	be	fire,	and	without	the	help	of	sun,	moon	and
fire,	no	one	can	live.	These	are	some	thoughts	to	provoke	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness
in	the	conditioned	soul.
TEXT	13
ग ा म ा ि व ᇽ य
	
च
	
भ ू त ा ि न
	
ध ा र य ा ᇸ य ह म ो ज स ा
	
।
प ु ᇾ ण ा ि म
	
च ौ ष ध ी ः
	
स व ा ᆼ ः
	
स ो म ो
	
भ ू ᇰ व ा
	
र स ा ᇰ म क ः
	
॥
१ ३
॥
gām	āviśya	ca	bhūtāni
dhārayāmy	aham	ojasā
puṣṇāmi	cauṣadhīḥ	sarvāḥ
somo	bhūtvā	rasātmakaḥ
gām—
the	planets;	
āviśya—
entering;	
ca—
also;	
bhūtāni—
living	entities;
dhārayāmi—
sustaining;	
aham—
I;
	ojasā—
by	My	energy;	
puṣṇāmi
—
nourishing;	
ca—
and;	
auṣadhīḥ—
all	vegetables;	
sarvāḥ—
all;	
somaḥ
—themoon;	
bhūtvā—	
becoming;	
rasa-ātmakaḥ—
supplying	the	juice.
TRANSLATION
I	enter	into	each	planet,	and	by	My	energy	they	stay	in	orbit.	I	become
the	moon	and	thereby	supply	the	juice	of	life	to	all	vegetables.
PURPORT
It	is	understood	that	all	the	planets	are	floating	in	the	air	only	by	the	energy
of	the	Lord.	The	Lord	enters	into	every	atom,	every	planet,	and	every	living
being.	That	is	discussed	in	the	
Brahma-saṁhitā.
	It	is	said	there	that	one
plenary	portion	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Paramātmā,	enters
into	the	planets,	the	universe,	the	living	entity,	and	even	into	the	atom.	So	due
to	His	entrance,	everything	is	appropriately	manifested.	When	the	spirit	soul	is
there,	a	living	man	can	float	on	the	water,	but	when	the	living	spark	is	out	of
the	body	and	the	body	is	dead,	it	sinks.	Of	course	when	it	is	decomposed	it
floats	just	like	straw	and	other	things,	but	as	soon	as	the	man	is	dead,	he	at
once	sinks	in	the	water.	Similarly,	all	these	planets	are	floating	in	space,	and
this	is	due	to	the	entrance	of	the	supreme	energy	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.	His	energy	is	sustaining	each	planet,	just	like	a	handful	of	dust.	If
someone	holds	a	handful	of	dust,	there	is	no	possibility	of	the	dust	falling,	but
if	one	throws	it	in	the	air,	it	will	fall	down.	Similarly,	these	planets,	which	are
floating	in	air,	are	actually	held	in	the	fist	of	the	universal	form	of	the
Supreme	Lord.	By	His	strength	and	energy,	all	moving	and	unmoving	things
stay	in	their	place.	It	is	said	that	because	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead,	the	sun	is	shining	and	the	planets	are	steadily	moving.	Were	it	not
for	Him,	all	the	planets	would	scatter,	like	dust	in	air,	and	perish.	Similarly,	it
is	due	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	that	the	moon	nourishes	all
vegetables.	Due	to	the	moon's	influence,	the	vegetables	become	delicious.
Without	the	moonshine,	the	vegetables	can	neither	grow	nor	taste	succulent.
Human	society	is	working,	living	comfortably	and	enjoying	food	due	to	the
supply	from	the	Supreme	Lord.	Otherwise,	mankind	could	not	survive.	The
word	
rasātmakaḥ
	is	very	significant.	Everything	becomes	palatable	by	the
agency	of	the	Supreme	Lord	through	the	influence	of	the	moon.
TEXT	14अ ह ं
	
व ै ᇽ व ा न र ो
	
भ ू ᇰ व ा
	
प ् र ा ि ण न ा ं
	
द े ह म ा ि श ् र त ः
	
।
प ् र ा ण ा प ा न स म ा य ु ᇧ त ः
	
प च ा ᇸ य ᇳ न ं
	
च त ु ि व ᆼ ध म ्
	
॥
१ ४
॥
ahaṁ	vaiśvānaro	bhūtvā
prāṇināṁ	deham	āśritaḥ
prāṇāpāna-samāyuktaḥ
pacāmy	annaṁ	catur-vidham
aham
—I;	
vaiśvānaraḥ
—by	My	plenary	portion	as	the	digesting	fire;	
bhūtvā
—
becoming;	
prāṇinām
—of	all	living	entities;	
deham—
body;	
āśritaḥ—
situated;	
prāṇa—
outgoing	air;	
apāna
—downgoing	air;	
samāyuktaḥ
—keep
balance;	
pacāmi
—digest;	
annam
—foodstuff;	
catur-vidham—
four	kinds	of.
TRANSLATION
I	am	the	fire	of	digestion	in	every	living	body,	and	I	am	the	air	of	life,
outgoing	and	incoming,	by	which	I	digest	the	four	kinds	of	foodstuff.
PURPORT
According	to	
Āyur-vedic	śāstra
,	we	understand	that	there	is	a	fire	in	the
stomach	which	digests	all	food	sent	there.	When	the	fire	is	not	blazing,	there
is	no	hunger,	and	when	the	fire	is	in	order,	we	become	hungry.	Sometimes
when	the	fire	is	not	going	nicely,	treatment	is	required.	In	any	case,	this	fire	is
representative	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Vedic	
mantras
	also
confirm	that	the	Supreme	Lord	or	Brahman	is	situated	in	the	form	of	fire
within	the	stomach	and	is	digesting	all	kinds	of	foodstuff.	Therefore	since	He
is	helping	the	digestion	of	all	kinds	of	foodstuff,	the	living	entity	is	not
independent	in	the	eating	process.	Unless	the	Supreme	Lord	helps	him	in
digesting,	there	is	no	possibility	of	eating.	He	thus	produces	and	digests
foodstuff,	and,	by	His	grace,	we	are	enjoying	life.	In	the	
Vedānta-sūtra	
this	is
also	confirmed:	
śabdādibhyo'ntaḥ	pratiṣṭhānāc	ca.	
The	Lord	is	situated	within
sound	and	within	the	body,	within	the	air	and	even	within	the	stomach	as	the
digestive	force.	There	are	four	kinds	of	foodstuff:	some	are	swallowed,	some
are	chewed,	some	are	licked	up,	and	some	are	sucked,	and	He	is	the	digestive
force	for	all	of	them.TEXT	15
स व ᆼ ᇿ य
	
च ा ह ं
	
ᇦ ि द
	
स ि ᇳ न ि व ᇾ ट ो
	
म ሧ ः
	
ᇿ म ृ ि त ᇥ ा ᆼ न म प ो ह न ᇮ च
	
।
व े द ै ᇽ च
	
स व ᆺ र ह म े व
	
व े ሱ ो
	
व े द ा ᇳ त क ृ ሲ े द ि व द े व
	
च ा ह म ्
	
॥
१ ५
॥
sarvasya	cāhaṁ	hṛdi	sanniviṣṭo
mattaḥ	smṛtir	jñānam	apohanaṁ	ca
vedaiś	ca	sarvair	aham	eva	vedyo
vedānta-kṛd	veda-vid	eva	cāham
sarvasya—
of	all	living	beings;	
ca—
and;	
aham—
I;
	hṛdi—
in	the	heart;
sanniviṣṭaḥ—
being	situated;	
mattaḥ—
from	Me;	
smṛtiḥ—
remembrance;
jñānam—
knowledge;	
apohanam	ca—
and	forgetfulness;	
vedaiḥ—
by	the	
Vedas;
ca—
also;	
sarvaiḥ—
all;	
aham
—I	am;	
eva
—certainly;	
vedyaḥ
—knowable;
vedānta-kṛt—
the	compiler	of	the	
Vedānta
;	
veda-vit—
the	knower	of	the	Vedas;
eva
—certainly;	
ca
—and;	
aham
—I.
TRANSLATION
I	am	seated	in	everyone's	heart,	and	from	Me	come	remembrance,
knowledge	and	forgetfulness.	By	all	the	Vedas	am	I	to	be	known;	indeed	I
am	the	compiler	of	Vedānta,	and	I	am	the	knower	of	the	Vedas.
PURPORT
The	Supreme	Lord	is	situated	as	Paramātmā	in	everyone's	heart,	and	it	is
from	Him	that	all	activities	are	initiated.	The	living	entity	forgets	everything
of	his	past	life,	but	he	has	to	act	according	to	the	direction	of	the	Supreme
Lord,	who	is	witness	to	all	his	work.	Therefore	he	begins	his	work	according
to	his	past	deeds.	Required	knowledge	is	supplied	to	him,	and	remembrance	is
given	to	him,	and	he	forgets,	also,	about	his	past	life.	Thus,	the	Lord	is	not
only	all-pervading;	He	is	also	localized	in	every	individual	heart.	He	awards
the	different	fruitive	results.	He	is	not	only	worshipable	as	the	impersonal
Brahman,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	and	the	localized	Paramātmā,but	as	the	form	of	the	incarnation	of	the	
Vedas
	as	well.	The	
Vedas
	give	the
right	direction	to	the	people	so	that	they	can	properly	mold	their	lives	and
come	back	to	Godhead,	back	to	home.	The	
Vedas
	offer	knowledge	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	and	Kṛṣṇa	in	His	incarnation	as
Vyāsadeva	is	the	compiler	of	the	
Vedānta-sūtra
.	The	commentation	on	the
Vedānta-sūtra
	by	Vyāsadeva	in	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
	gives	the	real
understanding	of	
Vedānta-sūtra
.	The	Supreme	Lord	is	so	full	that	for	the
deliverance	of	the	conditioned	soul	He	is	the	supplier	and	digester	of
foodstuff,	the	witness	of	his	activity,	the	giver	of	knowledge	in	the	form	of
Vedas
	and	as	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa,	the	teacher	of
the	
Bhagavad-gītā
.	He	is	worshipable	by	the	conditioned	soul.	Thus	God	is
all-good;	God	is	all-merciful.
Antaḥpraviṣṭaḥ	śāstā	janānām.
	The	living	entity	forgets	as	soon	as	he	quits
his	present	body,	but	he	begins	his	work	again,	initiated	by	the	Supreme	Lord.
Although	he	forgets,	the	Lord	gives	him	the	intelligence	to	renew	his	work
where	he	ended	his	last	life.	So	not	only	does	a	living	entity	enjoy	or	suffer	in
this	world	according	to	the	dictation	from	the	Supreme	Lord	situated	locally	in
the	heart,	but	he	receives	the	opportunity	to	understand	
Vedas
	from	Him.	If
one	is	serious	to	understand	the	Vedic	knowledge,	then	Kṛṣṇa	gives	the
required	intelligence.	Why	does	He	present	the	Vedic	knowledge	for
understanding?	Because	a	living	entity	individually	needs	to	understand
Kṛṣṇa.	Vedic	literature	confirms	this:	
yo	'sau	sarvair	vedair	gīyate
.	In	all
Vedic	literature,	beginning	from	the	four	
Vedas
,	
Vedānta-sūtra
	and	the
Upaniṣads
	and	
Purāṇas
,	the	glories	of	the	Supreme	Lord	are	celebrated.	By
performing	Vedic	rituals,	discussing	the	Vedic	philosophy	and	worshiping	the
Lord	in	devotional	service,	He	is	attained.	Therefore	the	purpose	of	the	
Vedas
is	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa.	The	
Vedas
	give	us	direction	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa	and
the	process	of	understanding.	The	ultimate	goal	is	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.	
Vedānta-sūtra
	confirms	this	in	the	following	words:	
tat	tu
samanvayāt
.	One	can	attain	perfection	by	understanding	Vedic	literature,	and
one	can	understand	his	relationship	with	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead
by	performing	the	different	processes.	Thus	one	can	approach	Him	and	at	the
end	attain	the	supreme	goal,	who	is	no	other	than	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.	In	this	verse,	however,	the	purpose	of	the	
Vedas
,	the	understanding
of	the	
Vedas
	and	the	goal	of	
Vedas
	are	clearly	defined.
TEXT	16ሲ ा ि व म ौ
	
प ु ኄ ष ौ
	
ल ो क े
	
ᇤ र ᇽ च ा ᇤ र
	
ए व
	
च
	
।
ᇤ र ः
	
स व ा ᆼ ि ण
	
भ ू त ा ि न
	
क ू ट ᇿ थ ो ऽ ᇤ र
	
उ ᇫ य त े
	
॥
१ ६
॥
dvāv	imau	puruṣau	loke
kṣaraś	cākṣara	eva	ca
kṣaraḥ	sarvāṇi	bhūtāni
kūṭastho	'kṣara	ucyate
dvau
—two;	
imau
—in	this	(world);	
puruṣau
—living	entities;	
loke—
in	the
world;	
kṣaraḥ
—fallible;	
ca
—and;	
akṣaraḥ
—infallible;	
eva
—certainly;	
ca
—
and;	
kṣaraḥ—
the	fallible;	
sarvāṇi
—all;	
bhūtāni—
living	entities;	
kūṭasthaḥ
—
in	oneness;	
akṣaraḥ
—infallible;	
ucyate
—is	said.
TRANSLATION
There	are	two	classes	of	beings,	the	fallible	and	the	infallible.	In	the
material	world	every	entity	is	fallible,	and	in	the	spiritual	world	every
entity	is	called	infallible.
PURPORT
As	already	explained,	the	Lord	in	His	incarnation	as	Vyāsadeva	compiled
the	
Vedānta-sūtra.	
Here	the	Lord	is	giving,	in	summary,	the	contents	of	the
Vedānta-sūtra:	
He	says	that	the	living	entities,	who	are	innumerable,	can	be
divided	into	two	classes–the	fallible	and	the	infallible.	The	living	entities	are
eternally	separated	parts	and	parcels	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.
When	they	are	in	contact	with	the	material	world,	they	are	called	
jīva-bhūtāḥ,
and	the	Sanskrit	words	given	here,	
sarvāṇi	bhūtāni,	
mean	that	they	are
fallible.	Those	who	are	in	oneness	with	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
however,	are	called	infallible.	Oneness	does	not	mean	that	they	have	no
individuality,	but	that	there	is	no	disunity.	They	are	all	agreeable	to	the
purpose	of	the	creation.	Of	course,	in	the	spiritual	world,	there	is	no	such	thing
as	creation,	but	since	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	has	stated	in	the
Vedānta-sūtra	
that	He	is	the	source	of	all	emanations,	that	conception	is
explained.
According	to	the	statement	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Lord
Kṛṣṇa,	there	are	two	classes	of	men.	The	
Vedas	
give	evidence	of	this,	so	thereis	no	doubt	about	it.	The	living	entities,	who	are	struggling	in	this	world	with
the	mind	and	five	senses,	have	their	material	bodies	which	are	changing	as
long	as	the	living	entities	are	conditioned.	One's	body	changes	due	to	contact
with	matter;	matter	is	changing,	so	the	living	entity	appears	to	be	changing.
But	in	the	spiritual	world	the	body	is	not	made	of	matter;	therefore	there	is	no
change.	In	the	material	world	the	living	entity	undergoes	six	changes–birth,
growth,	duration,	reproduction,	then	dwindling	and	vanishing.	These	are	the
changes	of	the	material	body.	But	in	the	spiritual	world	the	body	does	not
change;	there	is	no	old	age,	there	is	no	birth,	there	is	no	death.	There	all	exists
in	oneness.	It	is	more	clearly	explained	as	
sarvāṇi	bhūtāni:	
any	living	entity
who	has	come	in	contact	with	matter,	beginning	from	the	first	created	being,
Brahmā,	down	to	a	small	ant,	is	changing	its	body;	therefore	they	are	all
fallible.	In	the	spiritual	world,	however,	they	are	always	liberated	in	oneness.
TEXT	17
उ ሧ म ः
	
प ु ኄ ष ᇿ ᇰ व ᇳ य ः
	
प र म ा ᇰ म े ᇰ य ु द ा ᇦ त ः
	
।
य ो
	
ल ो क त ् र य म ा ि व ᇽ य
	
ि ब भ ᇰ य ᆼ ᇼ य य
	
ई ᇽ व र ः
	
॥
१ ७
॥
uttamaḥ	puruṣas	tv	anyaḥ
paramātmety	udāhṛtaḥ
yo	loka-trayam	āviśya
bibharty	avyaya	īśvaraḥ
uttamaḥ—
the	best;	
puruṣaḥ
—personality;	
tu—
but;	
anyaḥ—
another;	
param
—the	Supreme;	
ātmā—
Self;	
iti—
thus;	
udāhṛtaḥ—
said;	
yaḥ
—one	who;	
loka—
of	the	universe;	
trayam—
the	three	divisions;	
āviśya—
entering;	
bibharti—
maintaining;	
avyayaḥ—
inexhaustible;	
īśvaraḥ—
the	Lord.
TRANSLATION
Besides	these	two,	there	is	the	greatest	living	personality,	the	Lord
Himself,	who	has	entered	into	these	worlds	and	is	maintaining	them.
PURPORTThis	verse	is	very	nicely	expressed	in	the	
Kaṭha	Upaniṣad	
and	
Śvetāśvatara
Upaniṣad.	
It	is	clearly	stated	there	that	above	the	innumerable	living	entities,
some	of	whom	are	conditioned	and	some	of	whom	are	liberated,	there	is	the
Supreme	Personality	who	is	Paramātmā.	The	Upanisadic	verse	runs	as
follows:	
nityo	nityānāṁ	cetanaś	cetanānām.	
The	purport	is	that	amongst	all
the	living	entities,	both	conditioned	and	liberated,	there	is	one	supreme	living
personality,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	who	maintains	them	and
gives	them	all	the	facility	of	enjoyment	according	to	different	work.	That
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is	situated	in	everyone's	heart	as	Paramātmā.
A	wise	man	who	can	understand	Him	is	eligible	to	attain	the	perfect	peace,	not
others.
It	is	incorrect	to	think	of	the	Supreme	Lord	and	the	living	entities	as	being
on	the	same	level	or	equal	in	all	respects.	There	is	always	the	question	of
superiority	and	inferiority	in	their	personalities.	This	particular	word	
uttama	
is
very	significant.	No	one	can	surpass	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.
Loke	
is	also	significant	because	in	the	
Pauruṣa
,	a	Vedic	literature,	it	is	stated:
lokyate	vedārtho'nena.	
This	Supreme	Lord	in	His	localized	aspect	as
Paramātmā	explains	the	purpose	of	the	
Vedas.	
The	following	verse	also
appears	in	the	
Vedas:
tāvad	eṣa	samprasādo	'smāc
charīrāt	samutthāya	paraṁ
jyoti-rūpaṁ	sampadya	svena
rūpeṇābhiniṣpadyate	sa	uttamaḥ	puruṣaḥ
"The	Supersoul	coming	out	of	the	body	enters	the	impersonal	
brahmajyoti;
then	in	His	form	He	remains	in	His	spiritual	identity.	That	Supreme	is	called
the	Supreme	Personality."	This	means	that	the	Supreme	Personality	is
exhibiting	and	diffusing	His	spiritual	effulgence,	which	is	the	ultimate
illumination.	That	Supreme	Personality	also	has	a	localized	aspect	as
Paramātmā.	By	incarnating	Himself	as	the	son	of	Satyavatī	and	Parāśara,	He
explains	the	Vedic	knowledge	as	Vyāsadeva.
TEXT	18
य ᇿ म ा ᇰ ᇤ र म त ी त ो ऽ ह म ᇤ र ा द ि प
	
च ो ሧ म ः
	
।
अ त ो ऽ ि ᇿ म
	
ल ो क े
	
व े द े
	
च
	
प ् र ि थ त ः
	
प ु ኄ ष ो ሧ म ः
	
॥
१ ८
॥Pictures	Part	3
yasmāt	kṣaram	atīto	'ham
akṣarād	api	cottamaḥ
ato	'smi	loke	vede	ca
prathitaḥ	puruṣottamaḥ
yasmāt
—because;	
kṣaram—
the	fallible;	
atītaḥ—
transcendental;	
aham—
I;
akṣarāt—
from	the	infallible;	
api—
better	than	that;	
ca—
and;	
uttamaḥ—
the
best;	
ataḥ—
therefore;	
asmi—
I	am;	
loke—
in	the	world;	
vede—
in	the	Vedic
literature;	
ca—
and;	
prathitaḥ—
celebrated;	
puruṣottamaḥ—
as	the	Supreme
Personality.
TRANSLATION
Because	I	am	transcendental,	beyond	both	the	fallible	and	the
infallible,	and	because	I	am	the	greatest,	I	am	celebrated	both	in	the
world	and	in	the	Vedas	as	that	Supreme	Person.
PURPORT
No	one	can	surpass	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa–neither	the
conditioned	soul	nor	the	liberated	soul.	He	is,	therefore,	the	greatest	of
personalities.	Now	it	is	clear	here	that	the	living	entities	and	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead	are	individuals.	The	difference	is	that	the	living
entities,	either	in	the	conditioned	state	or	in	the	liberated	state,	cannot	surpass
in	quantity	the	inconceivable	potencies	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.
TEXT	19
य ो
	
म ा म े व म स ᇸ म ू ढ ो
	
ज ा न ा ि त
	
प ु ኄ ष ो ሧ म म ्
	
।
स
	
स व ᆼ ि व द ् भ ज ि त
	
म ा ं
	
स व ᆼ भ ा व े न
	
भ ा र त
	
॥
१ ९
॥
yo	mām	evam	asammūḍho
jānāti	puruṣottamam
sa	sarva-vid	bhajati	māṁsarva-bhāvena	bhārata
yaḥ
—anyone;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
evam
—certainly;	
asammūḍhaḥ—
without	a
doubt;	
jānāti
—knows;	
puruṣottamam—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead;
saḥ—
he;	
sarva-vit—
knower	of	everything;	
bhajati—
renders	devotional
service;	
mām
—unto	Me;	
sarva-bhāvena—
in	all	respects;	
bhārata—
O	son	of
Bharata.
TRANSLATION
Whoever	knows	Me	as	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	without
doubting,	is	to	be	understood	as	the	knower	of	everything,	and	he
therefore	engages	himself	in	full	devotional	service,	O	son	of	Bharata.
PURPORT
There	are	many	philosophical	speculations	about	the	constitutional	position
of	the	living	entities	and	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth.	Now	in	this	verse	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	clearly	explains	that	anyone	who	knows
Lord	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	Supreme	Person	is	actually	the	knower	of	everything.	The
imperfect	knower	goes	on	simply	speculating	about	the	Absolute	Truth,	but
the	perfect	knower,	without	wasting	his	valuable	time,	engages	directly	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	the	devotional	service	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	Throughout
the	whole	of	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
this	fact	is	being	stressed	at	every	step.	And	still
there	are	so	many	stubborn	commentators	on	
Bhagavad-gītā	
who	consider	the
Supreme	Absolute	Truth	and	the	living	entities	to	be	one	and	the	same.
Vedic	knowledge	is	called	
śruti,
	learning	by	aural	reception.	One	should
actually	receive	the	Vedic	message	from	authorities	like	Kṛṣṇa	and	His
representatives.	Here	Kṛṣṇa	distinguishes	everything	very	nicely,	and	one
should	hear	from	this	source.	Simply	to	hear	like	the	hogs	is	not	sufficient;
one	must	be	able	to	understand	from	the	authorities.	It	is	not	that	one	should
simply	speculate	academically.	One	should	submissively	hear	from	
Bhagavad-
gītā	
that	these	living	entities	are	always	subordinate	to	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.	Anyone	who	is	able	to	understand	this,	according	to
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa,	knows	the	purpose	of	the
Vedas;	
no	one	else	knows	the	purpose	of	the	
Vedas.
The	word	
bhajate
	is	very	significant.	In	many	places	the	word	
bhajate
	isexpressed	in	relationship	with	the	service	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	If	a	person	is
engaged	in	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	in	devotional	service	of	the	Lord,	it	is	to
be	understood	that	he	has	understood	all	the	Vedic	knowledge.	In	the	Vaiṣṇava
paramparā	
it	is	said	that	if	one	is	engaged	in	the	devotional	service	of	Kṛṣṇa,
then	there	is	no	need	for	a	spiritual	process	to	understand	the	Supreme
Absolute	Truth.	He	has	already	come	to	the	post	because	he	is	engaged	in	the
devotional	service	of	the	Lord.	He	has	ended	all	preliminary	processes	of
understanding;	similarly,	if	anyone,	after	speculating	for	hundreds	of
thousands	of	lives,	does	not	come	to	the	point	that	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead	and	that	one	has	to	surrender	there,	all	his	speculation
for	so	many	years	and	lives	is	a	useless	waste	of	time.
TEXT	20
इ ि त
	
ग ु ቋ त म ं
	
श ा ᇿ त ् र ि म द म ु ᇧ त ं
	
म य ा ऽ न घ
	
।
ए त ሮ ु द ् ᇲ व ा
	
ब ु द ् ि ध म ा ᇳ ᇿ य ा ᇰ क ृ त क ृ ᇰ य ᇽ च
	
भ ा र त
	
॥
२ ०
॥
iti	guhyatamaṁ	śāstram
idam	uktaṁ	mayānagha
etad	buddhvā	buddhimān	syāt
kṛta-kṛtyaś	ca	bhārata
iti—
thus;	
guhyatamam—
the	most	confidential;	
śāstram—
revealed
scriptures;	
idam—
this;	
uktam—
disclosed;	
mayā—
by	Me;	
anagha
—O	sinless
one;	
etat—
this;	
buddhvā—
understanding;	
buddhimān—
intelligent;	
syāt—
one
becomes;	
kṛta-kṛtyaḥ—
the	most	perfect;	
ca—
and;	
bhārata—
O	son	of	Bharata.
TRANSLATION
This	is	the	most	confidential	part	of	the	Vedic	scriptures,	O	sinless	one,
and	it	is	disclosed	now	by	Me.	Whoever	understands	this	will	become
wise,	and	his	endeavors	will	know	perfection.
PURPORT
The	Lord	clearly	explains	here	that	this	is	the	substance	of	all	revealedscriptures.	And	one	should	understand	this	as	it	is	given	by	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.	Thus	one	will	become	intelligent	and	perfect	in
transcendental	knowledge.	In	other	words,	by	understanding	this	philosophy
of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	and	engaging	in	His	transcendental
service,	everyone	can	become	freed	from	all	contaminations	of	the	modes	of
material	nature.	Devotional	service	is	a	process	of	spiritual	understanding.
Wherever	devotional	service	exists,	the	material	contamination	cannot	coexist.
Devotional	service	to	the	Lord	and	the	Lord	Himself	are	one	and	the	same
because	they	are	spiritual
—
the	internal	energy	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	The	Lord
is	said	to	be	the	sun,	and	ignorance	is	called	darkness.	Where	the	sun	is
present,	there	is	no	question	of	darkness.	Therefore,	whenever	devotional
service	is	present	under	the	proper	guidance	of	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master,
there	is	no	question	of	ignorance.
Everyone	must	take	to	this	consciousness	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	engage	in
devotional	service	to	become	intelligent	and	purified.	Unless	one	comes	to
this	position	of	understanding	Kṛṣṇa	and	engages	in	devotional	service,
however	intelligent	he	may	be	in	the	estimation	of	some	common	man,	he	is
not	perfectly	intelligent.
The	word	
anagha,	
by	which	Arjuna	is	addressed,	is	significant.	
Anagha,	
O
sinless	one,	means	that	unless	one	is	free	from	all	sinful	reactions,	it	is	very
difficult	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa.	One	has	to	become	free	from	all	contamination,
all	sinful	activities;	then	he	can	understand.	But	devotional	service	is	so	pure
and	potent	that	once	one	is	engaged	in	devotional	service	he	automatically
comes	to	the	stage	of	sinlessness.
While	performing	devotional	service	in	the	association	of	pure	devotees	in
full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	there	are	certain	things	which	require	to	be
vanquished	altogether.	The	most	important	thing	one	has	to	surmount	is
weakness	of	the	heart.	The	first	falldown	is	caused	by	the	desire	to	lord	it	over
material	nature.	Thus	one	gives	up	the	transcendental	loving	service	of	the
Supreme	Lord.	The	second	weakness	of	the	heart	is	that	as	one	increases	the
propensity	of	lording	it	over	material	nature,	he	becomes	attached	to	matter
and	the	possession	of	matter.	The	problems	of	material	existence	are	due	to
these	weaknesses	of	the	heart.
Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	Fifteenth	Chapter	of	the
Śrīmad-Bhagavad-gītā
	in	the	matter	of
	Puruṣottama-yoga,	
the	Yoga	of	the
Supreme	Person.Chapter-16
CHAPTER	SIXTEEN
The	Divine	and	Demoniac	Natures
TEXTS	1-3
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
अ भ य ं
	
स ᇰ ᇰ व स ं श ु द ् ि ध ᇥ ा ᆼ न य ो ग ᇼ य व ि ᇿ थ ि त ः
	
।
द ा न ं
	
द म ᇽ च
	
य ᇥ ᇽ च
	
ᇿ व ा ᇲ य ा य ᇿ त प
	
आ ज ᆼ व म ्
	
॥
१
॥
अ ि ह ं स ा
	
स ᇰ य म क ् र ो ध ᇿ ᇰ य ा ग ः
	
श ा ि ᇳ त र प ै श ु न म ्
	
।
द य ा
	
भ ू त े ᇾ व ल ो ल ु ᇴ ᇰ व ं म ा द ᆼ व ं
	
ह ् र ी र च ा प ल म ्
	
॥
२
॥
त े ज ः
	
ᇤ म ा
	
ध ृ ि त ः
	
श ौ च म द ् र ो ह ो
	
न ा ि त म ा ि न त ा
	
।
भ व ि ᇳ त
	
स ᇸ प द ं
	
द ै व ी म ि भ ज ा त ᇿ य
	
भ ा र त
	
॥
३
॥śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
abhayaṁ	sattva-saṁśuddhir
jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ
dānaṁ	damaś	ca	yajñaś	ca
svādhyāyas	tapa	ārjavam
ahiṁsā	satyam	akrodhas
tyāgaḥ	śāntir	apaiśunam
dayā	bhūteṣv	aloluptvaṁ
mārdavaṁ	hrīr	acāpalam
tejaḥ	kṣamā	dhṛtiḥ	śaucam
adroho	nātimānitā
bhavanti	sampadaṁ	daivīm
abhijātasya	bhārata
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
abhayam
—fearlessness;	
sattva-saṁśuddhiḥ—
purification	of	one's	existence;	
jñāna—
knowledge;	
yoga—
of	linking	up;	
vyavasthitiḥ—
the	situation;	
dānam—	
charity;
damaḥ	ca—
and	controlling	the	mind;	
yajñaḥ	ca
—and	performance	of
sacrifice;	
svādhyāyaḥ—
study	of	Vedic	literature;	
tapaḥ—
austerity;	
ārjavam
—
simplicity;	
ahiṁsā—
nonviolence;	
satyam—
truthfulness;	
akrodhaḥ	—
freedom
from	anger;	
tyāgaḥ—
renunciation;	
śāntiḥ—
tranquility;	
apaiśunam	—
aversion
to	faultfinding;	
dayā—
mercy;	
bhūteṣu—
towards	all	living	entities;	
aloluptvam
—
freedom	from	greed;	
mārdavam—
gentleness;	
hrīḥ—
modesty;	
acāpalam
—
determination;	
tejaḥ—
vigor;	
kṣamā—
forgiveness;	
dhṛtiḥ—
fortitude;	
śaucam
—
cleanliness;	
adrohaḥ
—freedom	from	envy;	
na
—not;	
atimānitā
—
expectation	of	honor;	
bhavanti—
become;	
sampadam—
qualities;	
daivīm—
transcendental;	
abhijātasya—
one	who	is	born	of;	
bhārata—
O	son	of	Bharata.
TRANSLATION
The	Blessed	Lord	said:	Fearlessness,	purification	of	one's	existence,
cultivation	of	spiritual	knowledge,	charity,	self-control,	performance	of
sacrifice,	study	of	the	Vedas,	austerity	and	simplicity;	nonviolence,
truthfulness,	freedom	from	anger;	renunciation,	tranquility,	aversion	to
faultfinding,	compassion	and	freedom	from	covetousness;	gentleness,
modesty	and	steady	determination;	vigor,	forgiveness,	fortitude,
cleanliness,	freedom	from	envy	and	the	passion	for	honor—thesetranscendental	qualities,	O	son	of	Bharata,	belong	to	godly	men	endowed
with	divine	nature.
PURPORT
In	the	beginning	of	the	Fifteenth	Chapter,	the	banyan	tree	of	this	material
world	was	explained.	The	extra	roots	coming	out	of	it	were	compared	to	the
activities	of	the	living	entities,	some	auspicious,	some	inauspicious.	In	the
Ninth	Chapter,	also,	the	
devas,
	or	godly,	and	the	
asuras
,	the	ungodly,	or
demons,	were	explained.	Now,	according	to	Vedic	rites,	activities	in	the	mode
of	goodness	are	considered	auspicious	for	progress	on	the	path	of	liberation,
and	such	activities	are	known	as	
devaprakṛti
,	transcendental	by	nature.	Those
who	are	situated	in	the	transcendental	nature	make	progress	on	the	path	of
liberation.	For	those	who	are	acting	in	the	modes	of	passion	and	ignorance,	on
the	other	hand,	there	is	no	possibility	of	liberation.	Either	they	will	have	to
remain	in	this	material	world	as	human	beings,	or	they	will	descend	among
the	species	of	animals	or	even	lower	life	forms.	In	this	Sixteenth	Chapter	the
Lord	explains	both	the	transcendental	nature	and	its	attendant	qualities,	as
well	as	the	demoniac	nature	and	its	qualities.	He	also	explains	the	advantages
and	disadvantages	of	these	qualities.
The	word	
abhijātasya	
in	reference	to	one	born	of	transcendental	qualities	or
godly	tendencies	is	very	significant.	To	beget	a	child	in	a	godly	atmosphere	is
known	in	the	Vedic	scriptures	as	
Garbhādhāna-	saṁskāra.	
If	the	parents	want
a	child	in	the	godly	qualities	they	should	follow	the	ten	principles	of	the
human	being.	In	
Bhagavad-gītā	
we	have	studied	also	before	that	sex	life	for
begetting	a	good	child	is	Kṛṣṇa	Himself.	Sex	life	is	not	condemned	provided
the	process	is	used	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Those	who	are	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	at	least	should	not	beget	children	like	cats	and	dogs	but	should
beget	them	so	they	may	become	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	after	birth.	That	should	be
the	advantage	of	children	born	of	a	father	or	mother	absorbed	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.
The	social	institution	known	as	
varṇāśrama-dharma—
the	institution
dividing	society	into	four	divisions	or	castes
—
is	not	meant	to	divide	human
society	according	to	birth.	Such	divisions	are	in	terms	of	educational
qualifications.	They	are	to	keep	the	society	in	a	state	of	peace	and	prosperity.
The	qualities	mentioned	herein	are	explained	as	transcendental	qualities	meant
for	making	a	person	progress	in	spiritual	understanding	so	he	can	get	liberated
from	the	material	world.	In	the	
varṇāśrama	
institution	the	
sannyāsī,	
or	theperson	in	the	renounced	order	of	life,	is	considered	to	be	the	head	or	the
spiritual	master	of	all	the	social	statuses	and	orders.	A
	brāhmaṇa	
is	considered
to	be	the	spiritual	master	of	the	three	other	sections	of	a	society,	namely,	the
kṣatriyas,	
the	
vaiśyas	
and	the	
śūdras,	
but	a	
sannyāsī
,	who	is	on	the	top	of	the
institution,	is	considered	to	be	the	spiritual	master	of	the	
brāhmaṇas	
also.	For
a	
sannyāsī
,	the	first	qualification	should	be	fearlessness.	Because	a	
sannyāsī
has	to	be	alone	without	any	support	or	guarantee	of	support,	he	has	simply	to
depend	on	the	mercy	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	If	he	thinks,
"After	leaving	my	connections,	who	will	protect	me?"	he	should	not	accept
the	renounced	order	of	life.	One	must	be	fully	convinced	that	Kṛṣṇa	or	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	in	His	localized	aspect	as	Paramātmā	is
always	within,	that	He	is	seeing	everything	and	He	always	knows	what	one
intends	to	do.	One	must	thus	have	firm	conviction	that	Kṛṣṇa	as	Paramātmā
will	take	care	of	a	soul	surrendered	to	Him.	"I	shall	never	be	alone,"	one
should	think.	"Even	if	I	live	in	the	darkest	regions	of	a	forest	I	shall	be
accompanied	by	Kṛṣṇa,	and	He	will	give	me	all	protection."	That	conviction	is
called	
abhayam,	
without	fear.	This	state	of	mind	is	necessary	for	a	person	in
the	renounced	order	of	life.	Then	he	has	to	purify	his	existence.	There	are	so
many	rules	and	regulations	to	be	followed	in	the	renounced	order	of	life.	Most
important	of	all,	a	
sannyāsī	
is	strictly	forbidden	to	have	any	intimate
relationship	with	a	woman.	He	is	even	forbidden	to	talk	with	a	woman	in	a
secluded	place.	Lord	Caitanya	was	an	ideal	
sannyāsī,	
and	when	He	was	at	Purī
His	feminine	devotees	could	not	even	come	near	to	offer	their	respects.	They
were	advised	to	bow	down	from	a	distant	place.	This	is	not	a	sign	of	hatred	for
women	as	a	class,	but	it	is	a	stricture	imposed	on	the	
sannyāsī	
not	to	have
close	connections	with	women.	One	has	to	follow	the	rules	and	regulations	of
a	particular	status	of	life	in	order	to	purify	his	existence.	For	a	
sannyāsī,
intimate	relations	with	women	and	possessions	of	wealth	for	sense
gratification	are	strictly	forbidden.	The	ideal	
sannyāsī	
was	Lord	Caitanya
Himself,	and	we	can	learn	from	His	life	that	He	was	very	strict	in	regards	to
women.	Although	He	is	considered	to	be	the	most	liberal	incarnation	of
Godhead,	accepting	the	most	fallen	conditioned	souls,	He	strictly	followed	the
rules	and	regulations	of	the	
sannyāsa	
order	of	the	life	in	connection	with
association	with	woman.	One	of	His	personal	associates,	namely	Choṭa
Haridāsa,	was	personally	associated	with	Lord	Caitanya,	along	with	His	other
confidential	personal	associates,	but	somehow	or	other	this	Choṭa	Haridāsa
looked	lustily	on	a	young	woman,	and	Lord	Caitanya	was	so	strict	that	He	at
once	rejected	him	from	the	society	of	His	personal	associates.	Lord	Caitanyasaid,	"For	a	
sannyāsī	
or	anyone	who	is	aspiring	to	get	out	of	the	clutches	of
material	nature	and	trying	to	elevate	himself	to	the	spiritual	nature	and	go
back	to	home,	back	to	Godhead,	for	him,	looking	toward	material	possessions
and	women	for	sense	gratification
—
not	even	enjoying	them,	but	just	looking
toward	them	with	such	a	propensity
—
is	so	condemned	that	he	had	better
commit	suicide	before	experiencing	such	illicit	desires."	So	these	are	the
processes	for	purification.
The	next	item	is	
jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ:
	being	engaged	in	the	cultivation
of	knowledge.	
Sannyāsī
	life	is	meant	for	distributing	knowledge	to	the
householders	and	others	who	have	forgotten	their	real	life	of	spiritual
advancement.	A	
sannyāsī
	is	supposed	to	beg	from	door	to	door	for	his
livelihood,	but	this	does	not	mean	that	he	is	a	beggar.	Humility	is	also	one	of
the	qualifications	of	a	transcendentally	situated	person,	and	out	of	sheer
humility	the	
sannyāsī
	goes	from	door	to	door,	not	exactly	for	the	purpose	of
begging,	but	to	see	the	householders	and	awaken	them	to	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	This	is	the	duty	of	a	
sannyāsī
.	If	he	is	actually	advanced	and	so
ordered	by	his	spiritual	master,	he	should	preach	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	with
logic	and	understanding,	and	if	he	is	not	so	advanced	he	should	not	accept	the
renounced	order	of	life.	But	even	if	he	has	accepted	the	renounced	order	of
life	without	sufficient	knowledge,	he	should	engage	himself	fully	in	hearing
from	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master	to	cultivate	knowledge.	A	
sannyāsī
	or	one	in
the	renounced	order	of	life	must	be	situated	in	fearlessness,	
sattva-saṁśuddhiḥ
(purity)	and	
jñāna-yoga
	(knowledge).
The	next	item	is	charity.	Charity	is	meant	for	the	householders.	The
householders	should	earn	a	livelihood	by	an	honorable	means	and	spend	fifty
percent	of	their	income	to	propagate	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	all	over	the	world.
Thus	a	householder	should	give	in	charity	to	such	institutional	societies	that
are	engaged	in	that	way.	Charity	should	be	given	to	the	right	receiver.	There
are	different	kinds	of	charities,	as	will	be	explained	later	on,	charity	in	the
modes	of	goodness,	passion	and	ignorance.	Charity	in	the	mode	of	goodness	is
recommended	by	the	scriptures,	but	charity	in	the	modes	of	passion	and
ignorance	is	not	recommended	because	it	is	simply	a	waste	of	money.	Charity
should	be	given	only	to	propagate	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	all	over	the	world.
That	is	charity	in	the	mode	of	goodness.
Then	as	far	as	
damaḥ
	(self-control)	is	concerned,	it	is	not	only	meant	for
other	orders	of	religious	society,	but	it	is	especially	meant	for	the	householder.
Although	he	has	a	wife,	a	householder	should	not	use	his	senses	for	sex	life
unnecessarily.	There	are	restrictions	for	the	householders	even	in	sex	life,which	should	only	be	engaged	in	for	the	propagation	of	children.	If	he	does
not	require	children,	he	should	not	enjoy	sex	life	with	his	wife.	Modern
society	enjoys	sex	life	with	contraceptive	methods	or	more	abominable
methods	to	avoid	the	responsibility	of	children.	This	is	not	in	the
transcendental	quality	but	is	demoniac.	If	anyone,	even	if	he	is	a	householder,
wants	to	make	progress	in	spiritual	life,	he	must	control	his	sex	life	and	should
not	beget	a	child	without	the	purpose	of	serving	Kṛṣṇa.	If	he	is	able	to	beget
children	who	will	be	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	one	can	produce	hundreds	of
children,	but	without	this	capacity	one	should	not	indulge	only	for	sense
pleasure.
Sacrifice	is	another	item	to	be	performed	by	the	householders	because
sacrifices	require	a	large	amount	of	money.	Other	orders	of	life,	namely	the
brahmacarya,	
the	
vānaprastha	
and	
sannyāsa,	
have	no	money;	they	live	by
begging.	So	performance	of	different	types	of	sacrifice	is	meant	for	the
householder.	They	should	perform	
agni-hotra	
sacrifices	as	enjoined	in	the
Vedic	literature,	but	such	sacrifices	at	the	present	moment	are	very	expensive,
and	it	is	not	possible	for	any	householder	to	perform	them.	The	best	sacrifice
recommended	in	this	age	is	called	
saṅkīrtana-yajña,	
the	chanting	of	Hare
Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/Hare	Rāma,	Hare	Rāma,	Rāma
Rāma,	Hare	Hare.	This	is	the	best	and	most	inexpensive	sacrifice;	everyone
can	adopt	it	and	derive	benefit.	So	these	three	items,	namely	charity,	sense
control	and	performance	of	sacrifice,	are	meant	for	the	householder.
Then	
svādhyāyaḥ,	
Vedic	study,	and	
tapas,	
austerity,	and	
ārjavam
,
gentleness	or	simplicity,	are	meant	for	the	
brahmacarya	
or	student	life.
Brahmacārīs	
should	have	no	connection	with	women;	they	should	live	a	life
of	celibacy	and	engage	the	mind	in	the	study	of	Vedic	literature	for	cultivation
of	spiritual	knowledge.	This	is	called	
svādhyāyaḥ.	Tapas	
or	austerity	is
especially	meant	for	the	retired	life.	One	should	not	remain	a	householder
throughout	his	whole	life;	he	must	always	remember	that	there	are	four
divisions	of	life,	
brahmacarya,	gṛhastha,	vānaprastha	
and	
sannyāsa.	
So	after
gṛhastha,	
householder	life,	one	should	retire.	If	one	lives	for	a	hundred	years,
he	should	spend	twenty-five	years	in	student	life,	twenty-five	in	householder
life,	twenty-five	in	retired	life	and	twenty-five	in	the	renounced	order	of	life.
These	are	the	regulations	of	the	Vedic	religious	discipline.	A	man	retired	from
household	life	must	practice	austerities	of	the	body,	mind	and	tongue.	That	is
tapasyā.	
The	entire	
varṇāśrama-dharma	
society	is	meant	for	
tapasyā.	
Without
tapasyā	
or	austerity	no	human	being	can	get	liberation.	The	theory	that	there
is	no	need	of	austerity	in	life,	that	one	can	go	on	speculating	and	everythingwill	be	nice,	is	neither	recommended	in	the	Vedic	literature	nor	in	
Bhagavad-
gītā.	
Such	theories	are	manufactured	by	showbottle	spiritualists	who	are	trying
to	gather	more	followers.	If	there	are	restrictions,	rules	and	regulations,	people
will	not	become	attracted.	Therefore	those	who	want	followers	in	the	name	of
religion,	just	to	have	a	show	only,	don't	restrict	the	lives	of	their	students	nor
their	own	lives.	But	that	method	is	not	approved	by	the	
Vedas.
As	far	as	simplicity	is	concerned,	not	only	should	a	particular	order	of	life
follow	this	principle,	but	every	member,	be	he	in	the	
brahmacarya-
āśrama
,	or
gṛhastha-āśrama
	or	
vānaprastha-āśrama
.	One	must	live	very	simply.
Ahiṁsā	
means	not	arresting	the	progressive	life	of	any	living	entity.	One
should	not	think	that	since	the	spirit	spark	is	never	killed	even	after	the	killing
of	the	body	there	is	no	harm	in	killing	animals	for	sense	gratification.	People
are	now	addicted	to	eating	animals,	in	spite	of	having	an	ample	supply	of
grains,	fruits	and	milk.	There	is	no	necessity	for	animal	killing.	This
injunction	is	for	everyone.	When	there	is	no	other	alternative,	one	may	kill	an
animal,	but	it	should	be	offered	in	sacrifice.	At	any	rate,	when	there	is	an
ample	food	supply	for	humanity,	persons	who	are	desiring	to	make
advancement	in	spiritual	realization	should	not	commit	violence	to	animals.
Real	
ahiṁsā	
means	not	checking	anyone's	progressive	life.	The	animals	are
also	making	progress	in	their	evolutionary	life	by	transmigrating	from	one
category	of	animal	life	to	another.	If	a	particular	animal	is	killed,	then	his
progress	is	checked.	If	an	animal	is	staying	in	a	particular	body	for	so	many
days	or	so	many	years	and	is	untimely	killed,	then	he	has	to	come	back	again
in	that	form	of	life	to	complete	the	remaining	days	in	order	to	be	promoted	to
another	species	of	life.	So	their	progress	should	not	be	checked	simply	to
satisfy	one's	palate.	This	is	called	
ahiṁsā.
Satyam.	
This	word	means	that	one	should	not	distort	the	truth	for	some
personal	interest.	In	Vedic	literature	there	are	some	difficult	passages,	but	the
meaning	or	the	purpose	should	be	learned	from	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master.
That	is	the	process	for	understanding	
Vedas.	Śruti	
means	that	one	should	hear
from	the	authority.	One	should	not	construe	some	interpretation	for	his
personal	interest.	There	are	so	many	commentaries	on	
Bhagavad-gītā	
that
misinterpret	the	original	text.	The	real	import	of	the	word	should	be	presented,
and	that	should	be	learned	from	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master.
Akrodhaḥ	
means	to	check	anger.	Even	if	there	is	provocation	one	should	be
tolerant,	for	once	one	becomes	angry	his	whole	body	becomes	polluted.	Anger
is	the	product	of	the	modes	of	passion	and	lust,	so	one	who	is	transcendentally
situated	should	check	himself	from	anger.	
Apaiśunam	
means	that	one	shouldnot	find	fault	with	others	or	correct	them	unnecessarily.	Of	course	to	call	a
thief	a	thief	is	not	faultfinding,	but	to	call	an	honest	person	a	thief	is	very
much	offensive	for	one	who	is	making	advancement	in	spiritual	life.	
Hrīḥ
means	that	one	should	be	very	modest	and	must	not	perform	some	act	which
is	abominable.	
Acāpalam,	
determination,	means	that	one	should	not	be
agitated	or	frustrated	in	some	attempt.	There	may	be	failure	in	some	attempt,
but	one	should	not	be	sorry	for	that;	he	should	make	progress	with	patience
and	determination.	The	word	
tejaḥ	
used	here	is	meant	for	the	
kṣatriyas.	
The
kṣatriyas	
should	always	be	very	strong	to	be	able	to	give	protection	to	the
weak.	They	should	not	pose	themselves	as	nonviolent.	If	violence	is	required,
they	must	exhibit	it.
Śaucam	
means	cleanliness,	not	only	in	mind	and	body	but	in	one's	dealings
also.	It	is	especially	meant	for	the	mercantile	people,	who	should	not	deal	in
the	black	market.	
Nātimānitā,	
not	expecting	honor,	applies	to	the	
śūdras,	
the
worker	class,	which	are	considered,	according	to	Vedic	injunctions,	to	be	the
lowest	of	the	four	classes.	They	should	not	be	puffed	up	with	unnecessary
prestige	or	honor	and	should	remain	in	their	own	status.	It	is	the	duty	of	the
śūdras
	to	offer	respect	to	the	higher	class	for	the	upkeep	of	the	social	order.
All	these	sixteen	qualifications	mentioned	are	transcendental	qualities.	They
should	be	cultivated	according	to	the	different	statuses	of	the	social	order.	The
purport	is	that	even	though	material	conditions	are	miserable,	if	these	qualities
are	developed	by	practice,	by	all	classes	of	men,	then	gradually	it	is	possible
to	rise	to	the	highest	platform	of	transcendental	realization.
TEXT	4
द ᇸ भ ो
	
द प ो ᆼ ऽ ि भ म ा न ᇽ च
	
क ् र ो ध ः
	
प ा ኄ ᇾ य म े व
	
च
	
।
अ ᇥ ा न ं
	
च ा ि भ ज ा त ᇿ य
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
स ᇸ प द म ा स ु र ी म ्
	
॥
४
॥
dambho	darpo	'bhimānaś	ca
krodhaḥ	pāruṣyam	eva	ca
ajñānaṁ	cābhijātasya
pārtha	sampadam	āsurīm
dambhaḥ—
pride;	
darpaḥ—
arrogance;	
abhimānaḥ—
conceit;	
ca—
and;
krodaḥ—
anger;	
pāruṣyam—
harshness;	
eva—
certainly;	
ca—
and;	
ajñānam—
ignorance;	
ca—
and;	
abhijātasya—
one	who	is	born;	
pārtha
—O	son	of	Pṛthā;sampadam—
nature;	
āsurīm—
demoniac.
TRANSLATION
Arrogance,	pride,	anger,	conceit,	harshness	and	ignorance—these
qualities	belong	to	those	of	demonic	nature,	O	son	of	Pṛthā.
PURPORT
In	this	verse,	the	royal	road	to	hell	is	described.	The	demoniac	want	to
make	a	show	of	religion	and	advancement	in	spiritual	science,	although	they
do	not	follow	the	principles.	They	are	always	arrogant	or	proud	in	possessing
some	type	of	education	or	so	much	wealth.	They	desire	to	be	worshiped	by
others,	and	demand	respectability,	although	they	do	not	command	respect.
Over	trifles	they	become	very	angry	and	speak	harshly,	not	gently.	They	do
not	know	what	should	be	done	and	what	should	not	be	done.	They	do
everything	whimsically,	according	to	their	own	desire,	and	they	do	not
recognize	any	authority.	These	demoniac	qualities	are	taken	on	by	them	from
the	beginning	of	their	bodies	in	the	wombs	of	their	mothers,	and	as	they	grow
they	manifest	all	these	inauspicious	qualities.
TEXT	5
द ै व ी
	
स ᇸ प द ् ि व म ो ᇤ ा य
	
ि न ब ᇳ ध ा य ा स ु र ी
	
म त ा
	
।
म ा
	
श ु च ः
	
स ᇸ प द ं
	
द ै व ी म ि भ ज ा त ो ऽ ि स
	
प ा ᇯ ड व
	
॥
५
॥
daivī	sampad	vimokṣāya
nibandhāyāsurī	matā
mā	śucaḥ	sampadaṁ	daivīm
abhijāto	'si	pāṇḍava
daivī
—transcendental;	
sampat
—nature;	
vimokṣāya
—meant	for	liberation;
nibandhāya
—for	bondage;	
āsurī
—demoniac	qualities;	
matā
—it	is	considered;
mā
—do	not;	
śucaḥ
—worry;	
sampadam
—nature;	
daivīm
—transcendental;
abhijātaḥ
—born;	
asi
—you	are;	
pāṇḍava
—O	son	of	Pandu.TRANSLATION
The	transcendental	qualities	are	conducive	to	liberation,	whereas	the
demonic	qualities	make	for	bondage.	Do	not	worry,	O	son	of	Pāṇḍu,	for
you	are	born	with	the	divine	qualities.
PURPORT
Lord	Kṛṣṇa	encouraged	Arjuna	by	telling	him	that	he	was	not	born	with
demoniac	qualities.	His	involvement	in	the	fight	was	not	demoniac	because	he
was	considering	the	pro's	and	con's.	He	was	considering	whether	respectable
persons	such	as	Bhīṣma	and	Droṇa	should	be	killed	or	not,	so	he	was	not
acting	under	the	influence	of	anger,	false	prestige,	or	harshness.	Therefore	he
was	not	of	the	quality	of	the	demons.	For	a	
kṣatriya,	
a	military	man,	shooting
arrows	at	the	enemy	is	considered	transcendental,	and	refraining	from	such	a
duty	is	demoniac.	Therefore,	there	was	no	cause	for	Arjuna	to	lament.	Anyone
who	performs	the	regulated	principles	of	the	different	orders	of	life	is
transcendentally	situated.
TEXT	6
ሲ ौ
	
भ ू त स ग ौ ᆼ
	
ल ो क े ऽ ि ᇿ म ᇳ द ै व
	
आ स ु र
	
ए व
	
च
	
।
द ै व ो
	
ि व ᇿ त र श ः
	
प ् र ो ᇧ त
	
आ स ु र ं
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
म े
	
श ृ ण ु
	
॥
६
॥
dvau	bhūta-sargau	loke	'smin
daiva	āsura	eva	ca
daivo	vistaraśaḥ	prokta
āsuraṁ	pārtha	me	śṛṇu
dvau—
two;	
bhūta-sargau—
created	living	beings;	
loke—
in	this	world;	
asmin
—this;	
daivaḥ—
godly;	
āsuraḥ—
demoniac;	
eva—
certainly;	
ca—
and;	
daivaḥ
—
divine;	
vistaraśaḥ—
at	great	length;	
proktaḥ
—said;	
āsuram
—demoniac;
pārtha—
O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
me—
from	Me;	
śṛṇu
—just	hear.
TRANSLATIONO	son	of	Pṛthā,	in	this	world	there	are	two	kinds	of	created	beings.	One
is	called	the	divine	and	the	other	demonic.	I	have	already	explained	to	you
at	length	the	divine	qualities.	Now	hear	from	Me	of	the	demoniac.
PURPORT
Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	having	assured	Arjuna	that	he	was	born	with	the	divine
qualities,	is	now	describing	the	demoniac	way.	The	conditioned	living	entities
are	divided	into	two	classes	in	this	world.	Those	who	are	born	with	divine
qualities	follow	a	regulated	life;	that	is	to	say	they	abide	by	the	injunctions	in
scriptures	and	by	the	authorities.	One	should	perform	duties	in	the	light	of
authoritative	scripture.	This	mentality	is	called	divine.	One	who	does	not
follow	the	regulative	principles	as	they	are	laid	down	in	the	scriptures	and
who	acts	according	to	his	whims	is	called	demoniac	or	asuric.	There	is	no
other	criterion	but	obedience	to	the	regulative	principles	of	scriptures.	It	is
mentioned	in	Vedic	literature	that	both	the	demigods	and	the	demons	are	born
of	the	Prajāpati;	the	only	difference	is	that	one	class	obeys	the	Vedic
injunctions	and	the	other	does	not.
TEXT	7
प ् र व ृ ि ሧ ं
	
च
	
ि न व ृ ि ሧ ं
	
च
	
ज न ा
	
न
	
ि व द ु र ा स ु र ा ः
	
।
न
	
श ौ च ं
	
न ा ि प
	
च ा च ा र ो
	
न
	
स ᇰ य ं
	
त े ष ु
	
ि व ሱ त े
	
॥
७
॥
pravṛttiṁ	ca	nivṛttiṁ	ca
janā	na	vidur	āsurāḥ
na	śaucaṁ	nāpi	cācāro
na	satyaṁ	teṣu	vidyate
pravṛttim—
proper	action;	
ca—
also;	
nivṛttim—
improper	action;	
ca—
and;
janāḥ—
persons;	
na—
never;	
viduḥ—
know;	
āsurāḥ—
in	demoniac	quality;	
na—
never;	
śaucam—
cleanliness;	
na—
nor;	
api—
also;	
ca—
and;	
ācāraḥ—
behavior;
na—
never;	
satyam—
truth;	
teṣu—
in	them;	
vidyate—
there	is.
TRANSLATIONThose	who	are	demoniac	do	not	know	what	is	to	be	done	and	what	is
not	to	be	done.	Neither	cleanliness	nor	proper	behavior	nor	truth	is	found
in	them.
PURPORT
In	every	civilized	human	society	there	is	some	set	of	scriptural	rules	and
regulations	which	are	followed	from	the	beginning,	especially	among	the
Āryans,	those	who	adopt	the	Vedic	civilization	and	who	are	known	as	the
most	advanced	civilized	peoples.	Those	who	do	not	follow	the	scriptural
injunctions	are	supposed	to	be	demons.	Therefore	it	is	stated	here	that	the
demons	do	not	know	the	scriptural	rules,	nor	do	they	have	any	inclination	to
follow	them.	Most	of	them	do	not	know	them,	and	even	if	some	of	them
know,	they	have	not	the	tendency	to	follow	them.	They	have	no	faith,	nor	are
they	willing	to	act	in	terms	of	the	Vedic	injunctions.	The	demons	are	not
clean,	either	externally	or	internally.
One	should	always	be	careful	to	keep	his	body	clean	by	bathing,	brushing
teeth,	changing	clothes,	etc.	As	far	as	internal	cleanliness	is	concerned,	one
should	always	remember	the	holy	names	of	God	and	chant	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare
Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Hare/Hare	Rāma,	Hare	Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,	Hare
Hare.	The	demons	neither	like	nor	follow	all	these	rules	for	external	and
internal	cleanliness.
As	for	behavior,	there	are	many	rules	and	regulations	guiding	human
behavior,	such	as	the	
Manu-saṁhitā,	
which	is	the	law	of	the	human	race.	Even
up	to	today,	those	who	are	Hindu	follow	the	
Manu-saṁhitā.
	Laws	of
inheritance	and	other	legalities	are	derived	from	this	book.	Now,	in	the	
Manu-
saṁhitā,	
it	is	clearly	stated	that	a	woman	should	not	be	given	freedom.	That
does	not	mean	that	women	are	to	be	kept	as	slaves,	but	they	are	like	children.
Children	are	not	given	freedom,	but	that	does	not	mean	that	they	are	kept	as
slaves.	The	demons	have	now	neglected	such	injunctions,	and	they	think	that
women	should	be	given	as	much	freedom	as	men.	However,	this	has	not
improved	the	social	condition	of	the	world.	Actually,	a	woman	should	be
given	protection	at	every	stage	of	life.	She	should	be	given	protection	by	the
father	in	her	younger	days,	by	the	husband	in	her	youth,	and	by	the	grownup
sons	in	her	old	age.	This	is	proper	social	behavior	according	to	the	
Manu-
saṁhitā.	
But	modern	education	has	artificially	devised	a	puffed	up	concept	of
womanly	life,	and	therefore	marriage	is	practically	now	an	imagination	in
human	society.	Nor	is	the	moral	condition	of	woman	very	good	now.	Thedemons,	therefore,	do	not	accept	any	instruction	which	is	good	for	society,	and
because	they	do	not	follow	the	experience	of	great	sages	and	the	rules	and
regulations	laid	down	by	the	sages,	the	social	condition	of	the	demoniac
people	is	very	miserable.
TEXT	8
अ स ᇰ य म प ् र ि त ᇾ ठ ं
	
त े
	
ज ग द ा ह ु र न ी ᇽ व र म ्
	
।
अ प र ᇿ प र स ᇸ भ ू त ं
	
ि क म ᇳ य ᇰ क ा म ह ै त ु क म ्
	
॥
८
॥
asatyam	apratiṣṭhaṁ	te
jagad	āhur	anīśvaram
aparaspara-sambhūtaṁ
kim	anyat	kāma-haitukam
asatyam
—unreal;	
apratiṣṭham—
without	foundation;	
te
—they;	
jagat—
the
cosmic	manifestation;	
āhuḥ
—is	said;	
anīśvaram
—with	no	controller;
aparaspara
—by	mutual	lust;	
sambhūtam—
caused;	
kim	anyat—
there	is	no
other	cause;	
kāma-haitukam—
it	is	due	to	lust	only.
TRANSLATION
They	say	that	this	world	is	unreal,	that	there	is	no	foundation	and	that
there	is	no	God	in	control.	It	is	produced	of	sex	desire,	and	has	no	cause
other	than	lust.
PURPORT
The	demoniac	conclude	that	the	world	is	phantasmagoria.	There	is	no
cause,	no	effect,	no	controller,	no	purpose:	everything	is	unreal.	They	say	that
this	cosmic	manifestation	arises	due	to	chance	material	actions	and	reactions.
They	do	not	think	that	the	world	was	created	by	God	for	a	certain	purpose.
They	have	their	own	theory:	that	the	world	has	come	about	in	its	own	way	and
that	there	is	no	reason	to	believe	that	there	is	a	God	behind	it.	For	them	there
is	no	difference	between	spirit	and	matter,	and	they	do	not	accept	the	Supreme
Spirit.	Everything	is	matter	only,	and	the	whole	cosmos	is	supposed	to	be	amass	of	ignorance.	According	to	them,	everything	is	void,	and	whatever
manifestation	exists	is	due	to	our	ignorance	in	perception.	They	take	it	for
granted	that	all	manifestation	of	diversity	is	a	display	of	ignorance.	Just	as	in	a
dream	we	may	create	so	many	things,	which	actually	have	no	existence,	so
when	we	are	awake	we	shall	see	that	everything	is	simply	a	dream.	But
factually,	although	the	demons	say	that	life	is	a	dream,	they	are	very	expert	in
enjoying	this	dream.	And	so,	instead	of	acquiring	knowledge,	they	become
more	and	more	implicated	in	their	dreamland.	They	conclude	that	as	a	child	is
simply	the	result	of	sexual	intercourse	between	man	and	woman,	this	world	is
born	without	any	soul.	For	them	it	is	only	a	combination	of	matter	that	has
produced	the	living	entities,	and	there	is	no	question	of	the	existence	of	the
soul.	As	many	living	creatures	come	out	from	perspiration	and	from	a	dead
body	without	any	cause,	similarly,	the	whole	living	world	has	come	out	of	the
material	combinations	of	the	cosmic	manifestation.	Therefore	material	nature
is	the	cause	of	this	manifestation,	and	there	is	no	other	cause.	They	do	not
believe	in	the	words	of	Kṛṣṇa	in	
Bhagavad-gītā:	mayādhyakṣeṇa	prakṛtiḥ
sūyate	sa-carācaram.	
"Under	My	direction	the	whole	material	world	is
moving."	In	other	words,	amongst	the	demons	there	is	no	perfect	knowledge
of	the	creation	of	this	world;	every	one	of	them	has	some	particular	theory	of
his	own.	According	to	them,	one	interpretation	of	the	scriptures	is	as	good	as
another,	for	they	do	not	believe	in	a	standard	understanding	of	the	scriptural
injunctions.
TEXT	9
ए त ा ं
	
द ृ ि ᇾ ट म व ᇾ ट ᇷ य
	
न ᇾ ट ा ᇰ म ा न ो ऽ ᇺ प ब ु ሬ य ः
	
।
प ् र भ व ᇳ ᇰ य ु ग ् र क म ा ᆼ ण ः
	
ᇤ य ा य
	
ज ग त ो ऽ ि ह त ा ः
	
॥
९
॥
etāṁ	dṛṣṭim	avaṣṭabhya
naṣṭātmāno	'lpa-buddhayaḥ
prabhavanty	ugra-karmāṇaḥ
kṣayāya	jagato	'hitāḥ
etām—
thus;	
dṛṣṭim—
vision;	
avaṣṭabhya—
accepting;	
naṣṭa—
lost;	
ātmānaḥ
—
self;	
alpa-buddhayaḥ—
less	intelligent;	
prabhavanti—
flourish;	
ugra-
karmāṇaḥ—
in	painful	activities;	
kṣayāya—
for	destruction;	
jagataḥ—
of	the
world;	
ahitāḥ—
unbeneficial.TRANSLATION
Following	such	conclusions,	the	demoniac,	who	are	lost	to	themselves
and	who	have	no	intelligence,	engage	in	unbeneficial,	horrible	works
meant	to	destroy	the	world.
PURPORT
The	demoniac	are	engaged	in	activities	that	will	lead	the	world	to
destruction.	The	Lord	states	here	that	they	are	less	intelligent.	The
materialists,	who	have	no	concept	of	God,	think	that	they	are	advancing.	But,
according	to	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
they	are	unintelligent	and	devoid	of	all	sense.
They	try	to	enjoy	this	material	world	to	the	utmost	limit	and	therefore	always
engage	in	inventing	something	for	sense	gratification.	Such	materialistic
inventions	are	considered	to	be	advancement	of	human	civilization,	but	the
result	is	that	people	grow	more	and	more	violent	and	more	and	more	cruel,
cruel	to	animals	and	cruel	to	other	human	beings.	They	have	no	idea	how	to
behave	toward	one	another.	Animal	killing	is	very	prominent	amongst
demoniac	people.	Such	people	are	considered	the	enemies	of	the	world
because	ultimately	they	will	invent	or	create	something	which	will	bring
destruction	to	all.	Indirectly,	this	verse	anticipates	the	invention	of	nuclear
weapons,	of	which	the	whole	world	is	today	very	proud.	At	any	moment	war
may	take	place,	and	these	atomic	weapons	may	create	havoc.	Such	things	are
created	solely	for	the	destruction	of	the	world,	and	this	is	indicated	here.	Due
to	godlessness,	such	weapons	are	invented	in	human	society;	they	are	not
meant	for	the	peace	and	prosperity	of	the	world.
TEXT	10
क ा म म ा ि श ् र ᇰ य
	
द ु ᇾ प ू र ं
	
द ᇸ भ म ा न म द ा ि ᇳ व त ा ः
	
।
म ो ह ा द ् ग ृ ह ी ᇰ व ा स द ् ग ᆻ ा ह ा ᇳ प ् र व त ᆼ ᇳ त े ऽ श ु ि च व ् र त ा ः
	
॥
१ ०
॥
kāmam	āśritya	duṣpūraṁ
dambha-māna-madānvitāḥ
mohād	gṛhītvāsad-grāhān
pravartante	'śuci-vratāḥkāmam—
lust;
	āśritya
—taking	shelter	of;	
duṣpūram—
insatiable;	
dambha—
pride;	
māna
—false	prestige;	
mada-anvitāḥ—
absorbed	in	conceit;	
mohāt—
by
illusion;	
gṛhītvā
—taking;	
asat
—nonpermanent;	
grāhān—
things;	
pravartante
—flourish;	
aśuci—
unclean;	
vratāḥ
—avowed.
TRANSLATION
The	demoniac,	taking	shelter	of	insatiable	lust,	pride	and	false	prestige,
and	being	thus	illusioned,	are	always	sworn	to	unclean	work,	attracted	by
the	impermanent.
PURPORT
The	demoniac	mentality	is	described	here.	The	demons'	lust	is	never
satiated.	They	will	go	on	increasing	and	increasing	their	insatiable	desires	for
material	enjoyment.	Although	they	are	always	full	of	anxieties	on	account	of
accepting	nonpermanent	things,	they	still	continue	to	engage	in	such	activities
out	of	illusion.	They	have	no	knowledge	and	cannot	tell	that	they	are	heading
the	wrong	way.	Accepting	nonpermanent	things,	such	demoniac	people	create
their	own	God,	create	their	own	hymns	and	chant	accordingly.	The	result	is
that	they	become	more	and	more	attracted	to	two	things–sex	enjoyment	and
accumulation	of	material	wealth.	The	word	
aśuci-vratāḥ,	
unclean	vow,	is	very
significant	in	this	connection.	Such	demoniac	people	are	only	attracted	by
wine,	women,	gambling	and	meat	eating;	those	are	their	
aśuci,	
unclean	habits.
Induced	by	pride	and	false	prestige,	they	create	some	principles	of	religion
which	are	not	approved	by	the	Vedic	injunctions.	Although	such	demoniac
people	are	most	abominable	in	the	world,	still,	by	artificial	means,	the	world
creates	a	false	honor	for	them.	Although	they	are	gliding	toward	hell,	they
consider	themselves	very	much	advanced.
TEXTS	11-12
ि च ᇳ त ा म प ि र म े य ा ं
	
च
	
प ् र ल य ा ᇳ त ा म ु प ा ि श ् र त ा ः
	
।
क ा म ो प भ ो ग प र म ा
	
ए त ा व ि द ि त
	
ि न ि ᇽ च त ा ः
	
॥
१ १
॥
आ श ा प ा श श त ै ब ᆼ ሬ ा ः
	
क ा म क ् र ो ध प र ा य ण ा ः
	
।
ई ह ᇳ त े
	
क ा म भ ो ग ा थ ᆼ म ᇳ य ा य े न ा थ ᆼ स ᇮ च य ा न ्
	
॥
१ २
॥cintām	aparimeyāṁ	ca
pralayāntām	upāśritāḥ
kāmopabhoga-paramā
etāvad	iti	niścitāḥ
āśā-pāśa-śatair	baddhāḥ
kāma-krodha-parāyaṇāḥ
īhante	kāma-bhogārtham
anyāyenārtha-sañcayān
cintām—
fears	and	anxieties;	
aparimeyām—
unmeasurable;	
ca—
and;
pralaya-antām—
unto	the	point	of	death;	
upāśritāḥ—
having	taken	shelter	of
them;	
kāma-upabhoga—
sense	gratification;	
paramāḥ—
the	highest	goal	of	life;
etāvat—
thus;	
iti—
in	this	way;	
niścitāḥ—
ascertain;	
āśā-pāśa—
entanglement	in
the	network	of	hope;	
śataiḥ—
by	hundreds;	
baddhāḥ—
being	bound;	
kāma
—
lust;	
krodha—
anger;	
parāyaṇāḥ—
always	situated	in	that	mentality;	
īhante
—
desire;	
kāma—
lust;	
bhoga—
sense	enjoyment;	
artham—
for	that	purpose;
anyāyena
—illegally;	
artha—
wealth;	
sañcayān—
accumulate.
TRANSLATION
They	believe	that	to	gratify	the	senses	unto	the	end	of	life	is	the	prime
necessity	of	human	civilization.	Thus	there	is	no	end	to	their	anxiety.
Being	bound	by	hundreds	and	thousands	of	desires,	by	lust	and	anger,
they	secure	money	by	illegal	means	for	sense	gratification.
PURPORT
The	demoniac	accept	that	the	enjoyment	of	the	senses	is	the	ultimate	goal	of
life,	and	this	concept	they	maintain	until	death.	They	do	not	believe	in	life
after	death,	and	they	do	not	believe	that	one	takes	on	different	types	of	bodies
according	to	one's	
karma,	
or	activities	in	this	world.	Their	plans	for	life	are
never	finished,	and	they	go	on	preparing	plan	after	plan,	all	of	which	are	never
finished.	We	have	personal	experience	of	a	person	of	such	demoniac
mentality,	who,	even	at	the	point	of	death,	was	requesting	the	physician	to
prolong	his	life	for	four	years	more	because	his	plans	were	not	yet	complete.
Such	foolish	people	do	not	know	that	a	physician	cannot	prolong	life	even	for
a	moment.	When	the	notice	is	there,	there	is	no	consideration	of	the	man'sdesire.	The	laws	of	nature	do	not	allow	a	second	beyond	what	one	is	destined
to	enjoy.
The	demoniac	person,	who	has	no	faith	in	God	or	the	Supersoul	within
himself,	performs	all	kinds	of	sinful	activities	simply	for	sense	gratification.
He	does	not	know	that	there	is	a	witness	sitting	within	his	heart.	The
Supersoul	is	observing	the	activities	of	the	individual	soul.	As	it	is	stated	in
the	Vedic	literature,	the	
Upaniṣads
,	there	are	two	birds	sitting	in	one	tree;	the
one	is	acting	and	enjoying	or	suffering	the	fruits	of	the	branches,	and	the	other
is	witnessing.	But	one	who	is	demoniac	has	no	knowledge	of	Vedic	scripture,
nor	has	he	any	faith;	therefore	he	feels	free	to	do	anything	for	sense
enjoyment,	regardless	of	the	consequences.
TEXTS	13-15
इ द म ሱ
	
म य ा
	
ल ᇶ ध ि म म ं
	
प ् र ा ᇴ ᇿ य े
	
म न ो र थ म ्
	
।
इ द म ᇿ त ी द म ि प
	
म े
	
भ ि व ᇾ य ि त
	
प ु न ध ᆼ न म ्
	
॥
१ ३
॥
अ स ौ
	
म य ा
	
ह त ः
	
श त ्ኄ ह ᆼ ि न ᇾ य े
	
च ा प र ा न ि प
	
।
ई ᇽ व र ो ऽ ह म ह ं
	
भ ो ग ी
	
ि स ሬ ो ऽ ह ं
	
ब ल व ा ᇳ स ु ख ी
	
॥
१ ४
॥
आ ढ ᆸ ो ऽ ि भ ज न व ा न ि ᇿ म
	
क ो ऽ ᇳ य ो ि ᇿ त
	
स द ृ श ो
	
म य ा
	
।
य ቎ य े
	
द ा ᇿ य ा ि म
	
म ो ि द ᇾ य
	
इ ᇰ य ᇥ ा न ि व म ो ि ह त ा ः
	
॥
१ ५
॥
idam	adya	mayā	labdham
imaṁ	prāpsye	manoratham
idam	astīdam	api	me
bhaviṣyati	punar	dhanam
asau	mayā	hataḥ	śatrur
haniṣye	cāparān	api
īśvaro	'ham	ahaṁ	bhogī
siddho	'haṁ	balavān	sukhī
āḍhyo	'bhijanavān	asmi
ko'nyo'sti	sadṛśo	mayā
yakṣye	dāsyāmi	modiṣya
ity	ajñāna-vimohitāḥ
idam—
this;	
adya—
today;	
mayā—
by	me;	
labdham—
gained;	
imam—
this;
prāpsye—
I	shall	gain;	
manoratham—
according	to	my	desires;	
idam—
this;	
asti
—
there	is;	
idam—
this;	
api—
also;	
me—
mine;	
bhaviṣyati—
will	increase	in	thefuture;	
punaḥ—
again;	
dhanam—
wealth;	
asau—
that;	
mayā—
by	me;	
hataḥ
—
has	been	killed;	
śatruḥ—
enemy;	
haniṣye—
I	shall	kill;	
ca—
also;	
aparān
—
others;	
api—
certainly;	
īśvaraḥ—
the	lord;	
aham—
I	am;	
aham—
I	am;	
bhogī
—
the	enjoyer;	
siddhah—
perfect;	
aham—
I	am;	
balavān—
powerful;	
sukhī—
happy;	
āḍhyaḥ—
wealthy;	
abhijanavān—
surrounded	by	aristocratic	relatives;
asmi—
I	am;	
kaḥ—
who	else;	
anyaḥ—
other;	
asti—
there	is;	
sadṛśaḥ—
like;	
mayā
—
me;	
yakṣye—
I	shall	sacrifice;	
dāsyāmi—
I	shall	give	in	charity;	
modiṣye—
I
shall	rejoice;	
iti—
thus;	
ajñāna—
ignorance;	
vimohitāḥ—
deluded	by.
TRANSLATION
The	demoniac	person	thinks:	"So	much	wealth	do	I	have	today,	and	I
will	gain	more	according	to	my	schemes.	So	much	is	mine	now,	and	it	will
increase	in	the	future,	more	and	more.	He	is	my	enemy,	and	I	have	killed
him;	and	my	other	enemy	will	also	be	killed.	I	am	the	lord	of	everything,	I
am	the	enjoyer,	I	am	perfect,	powerful	and	happy.	I	am	the	richest	man,
surrounded	by	aristocratic	relatives.	There	is	none	so	powerful	and	happy
as	I	am.	I	shall	perform	sacrifices,	I	shall	give	some	charity,	and	thus	I
shall	rejoice."	In	this	way,	such	persons	are	deluded	by	ignorance.
TEXT	16
अ न े क ि च ሧ ि व भ ् र ा ᇳ त ा
	
म ो ह ज ा ल स म ा व ृ त ा ः
	
।
प ् र स ᇧ त ा ः
	
क ा म भ ो ग े ष ु
	
प त ि ᇳ त
	
न र क े ऽ श ु च ौ
	
॥
१ ६
॥
aneka-citta-vibhrāntā
moha-jāla-samāvṛtāḥ
prasaktāḥ	kāma-bhogeṣu
patanti	narake	'śucau
aneka—
numerous;	
citta-vibhrāntāḥ—
perplexed	by	anxieties;	
moha—
of
illusions;	
jāla
—by	a	network;	
samāvṛtāḥ
—surrounded;	
prasaktāḥ
—attached;
kāma
—lust;	
bhogeṣu—
sense	gratification;	
patanti
—glides	down;	
narake
—
into	hell;	
aśucau
—unclean.
TRANSLATIONThus	perplexed	by	various	anxieties	and	bound	by	a	network	of
illusions,	one	becomes	too	strongly	attached	to	sense	enjoyment	and	falls
down	into	hell.
PURPORT
The	demoniac	man	knows	no	limit	to	his	desire	to	acquire	money.	That	is
unlimited.	He	only	thinks	how	much	assessment	he	has	just	now	and	schemes
to	engage	that	stock	of	wealth	farther	and	farther.	For	that	reason,	he	does	not
hesitate	to	act	in	any	sinful	way	and	so	deals	in	the	black	market	for	illegal
gratification.	He	is	enamoured	by	the	possessions	he	has	already,	such	as	land,
family,	house	and	bank	balance,	and	he	is	always	planning	to	improve	them.
He	believes	in	his	own	strength,	and	he	does	not	know	that	whatever	he	is
gaining	is	due	to	his	past	good	deeds.	He	is	given	an	opportunity	to
accumulate	such	things,	but	he	has	no	conception	of	past	causes.	He	simply
thinks	that	all	his	mass	of	wealth	is	due	to	his	own	endeavor.	A	demoniac
person	believes	in	the	strength	of	his	personal	work,	not	in	the	law	of	
karma.
According	to	the	law	of	
karma,	
a	man	takes	his	birth	in	a	high	family,	or
becomes	rich,	or	very	well	educated,	or	very	beautiful	because	of	good	work
in	the	past.	The	demoniac	thinks	that	all	these	things	are	accidental	and	due	to
the	strength	of	his	personal	ability.	He	does	not	sense	any	arrangement	behind
all	the	varieties	of	people,	beauty,	and	education.	Anyone	who	comes	into
competition	with	such	a	demoniac	man	is	his	enemy.	There	are	many
demoniac	people,	and	each	is	enemy	to	the	others.	This	enmity	becomes	more
and	more	deep–between	persons,	then	between	families,	then	between
societies,	and	at	last	between	nations.	Therefore	there	is	constant	strife,	war
and	enmity	all	over	the	world.
Each	demoniac	person	thinks	that	he	can	live	at	the	sacrifice	of	all	others.
Generally,	a	demoniac	person	thinks	of	himself	as	the	Supreme	God,	and	a
demoniac	preacher	tells	his	followers:	"Why	are	you	seeking	God	elsewhere?
You	are	all	yourselves	God!	Whatever	you	like,	you	can	do.	Don't	believe	in
God.	Throw	away	God.	God	is	dead."	These	are	the	demoniac's	preachings.
Although	the	demoniac	person	sees	others	equally	rich	and	influential,	or
even	more	so,	he	thinks	that	no	one	is	richer	than	him	and	that	no	one	is	more
influential	than	him.	As	far	as	promotion	to	the	higher	planetary	system	is
concerned,	he	does	not	believe	in	performing	
yajñas	
or	sacrifices.	Demons
think	that	they	will	manufacture	their	own	process	of	
yajña	
and	prepare	somemachine,	by	which	they	will	be	able	to	reach	any	higher	planet.	The	best
example	of	such	a	demoniac	man	was	Rāvaṇa.	He	offered	a	program	to	the
people	by	which	he	would	prepare	a	staircase	so	that	anyone	could	reach	the
heavenly	planets	without	performing	sacrifices,	such	as	are	prescribed	in	the
Vedas.	
Similarly,	in	the	present	age	such	demoniac	men	are	striving	to	reach
the	higher	planetary	systems	by	mechanical	arrangement.	These	are	examples
of	bewilderment.	The	result	is	that,	without	their	knowledge,	they	are	gliding
toward	hell.	Here	the	Sanskrit	word	
moha-jāla
	is	very	significant.	
Jāla	
means
net;	like	fishes	caught	in	a	net,	they	have	no	way	to	come	out.
TEXT	17
आ ᇰ म स ᇸ भ ा ि व त ा ः
	
ᇿ त ᇶ ध ा
	
ध न म ा न म द ा ि ᇳ व त ा ः
	
।
य ज ᇳ त े
	
न ा म य ᇥ ै ᇿ त े
	
द ᇸ भ े न ा ि व ि ध प ू व ᆼ क म ्
	
॥
१ ७
॥
ātma-sambhāvitāḥ	stabdhā
dhana-māna-madānvitāḥ
yajante	nāma-yajñais	te
dambhenāvidhi-pūrvakam
ātma-sambhāvitāḥ—
self-complacent;	
stabdhāḥ—
impudent;	
dhana-māna
—
wealth	and	false	prestige;	
mada-anvitāḥ—
absorbed	in	pride;	
yajante
—
perform	sacrifices;	
nāma—
in	name	only;	
yajñaiḥ—
with	such	a	sacrifice;	
te
—
they;	
dambhena—
out	of	pride;	
avidhi-pūrvakam—
without	following	any
rules	and	regulations.
TRANSLATION
Self-complacent	and	always	impudent,	deluded	by	wealth	and	false
prestige,	they	sometimes	perform	sacrifices	in	name	only	without
following	any	rules	or	regulations.
PURPORT
Thinking	themselves	all	in	all,	not	caring	for	any	authority	or	scripture,	the
demoniac	sometimes	perform	so-called	religious	or	sacrificial	rites.	And	sincethey	do	not	believe	in	authority,	they	are	very	impudent.	This	is	due	to	illusion
caused	by	accumulating	some	wealth	and	false	prestige.	Sometimes	such
demons	take	up	the	role	of	preacher,	mislead	the	people,	and	become	known
as	religious	reformers	or	as	incarnations	of	God.	They	make	a	show	of
performing	sacrifices,	or	they	worship	the	demigods,	or	manufacture	their
own	God.	Common	men	advertise	them	as	God	and	worship	them,	and	by	the
foolish	they	are	considered	advanced	in	the	principles	of	religion,	or	in	the
principles	of	spiritual	knowledge.	They	take	the	dress	of	the	renounced	order
of	life	and	engage	in	all	nonsense	in	that	dress.	Actually	there	are	so	many
restrictions	for	one	who	has	renounced	this	world.	The	demons,	however,	do
not	care	for	such	restrictions.	They	think	that	whatever	path	one	can	create	is
one's	own	path;	there	is	no	such	thing	as	a	standard	path	one	has	to	follow.
The	word	
avidhi-pūrvakam,	
meaning	disregard	for	the	rules	and	regulations,	is
especially	stressed	here.	These	things	are	always	due	to	ignorance	and
illusion.
TEXT	18
अ ह ं क ा र ं
	
ब ल ं
	
द प ᆾ
	
क ा म ं
	
क ् र ो ध ं
	
च
	
स ं ि श ् र त ा ः
	
।
म ा म ा ᇰ म प र द े ह े ष ु
	
प ् र द ् ि व ष ᇳ त ो ऽ ᇷ य स ू य क ा ः
	
॥
१ ८
॥
ahaṅkāraṁ	balaṁ	darpaṁ
kāmaṁ	krodhaṁ	ca	saṁśritāḥ
mām	ātma-para-deheṣu
pradviṣanto	'bhyasūyakāḥ
ahaṅkāram—
false	ego;	
balam—
strength;	
darpam—
pride;	
kāmam—
lust;
krodham—
anger;	
ca—
also;	
saṁśritāḥ—
having	taken	shelter	of;	
mām—
Me;
ātma
—one's	own;	
para-deheṣu—
in	other	bodies;	
pradviṣantaḥ—
blasphemes;
abhyasūyakāḥ—
envious.
TRANSLATION
Bewildered	by	false	ego,	strength,	pride,	lust	and	anger,	the	demon
becomes	envious	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	who	is	situated
in	his	own	body	and	in	the	bodies	of	others,	and	blasphemes	against	the
real	religion.PURPORT
A	demoniac	person,	being	always	against	God's	supremacy,	does	not	like	to
believe	in	the	scriptures.	He	is	envious	of	both	the	scriptures	and	of	the
existence	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	This	is	caused	by	his	so-
called	prestige	and	his	accumulation	of	wealth	and	strength.	He	does	not	know
that	the	present	life	is	a	preparation	for	the	next	life.	Not	knowing	this,	he	is
actually	envious	of	his	own	self,	as	well	as	of	others.	He	commits	violence	on
other	bodies	and	on	his	own.	He	does	not	care	for	the	supreme	control	of	the
Personality	of	Godhead	because	he	has	no	knowledge.	Being	envious	of	the
scriptures	and	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	he	puts	forward	false
arguments	against	the	existence	of	God	and	refutes	the	scriptural	authority.	He
thinks	himself	independent	and	powerful	in	every	action.	He	thinks	that	since
no	one	can	equal	him	in	strength,	power,	or	in	wealth,	he	can	act	in	any	way
and	no	one	can	stop	him.	If	he	has	an	enemy	who	might	check	the
advancement	of	his	sensual	activities,	he	makes	plans	to	cut	him	down	by	his
own	power.
TEXT	19
त ा न ह ं
	
द ् ि व ष त ः
	
क ् ኄ र ा ᇳ स ं स ा र े ष ु
	
न र ा ध म ा न ्
	
।
ि ᇤ प ा ᇸ य ज स ् र म श ु भ ा न ा स ु र ी ᇾ व े व
	
य ो ि न ष ु
	
॥
१ ९
॥
tān	ahaṁ	dviṣataḥ	krūrān
saṁsāreṣu	narādhamān
kṣipāmy	ajasram	aśubhān
āsurīṣv	eva	yoniṣu
tān
—those;	
aham
—I;	
dviṣataḥ—
envious;	
krūrān—
mischievous;	
saṁsāreṣu
—into	the	ocean	of	material	existence;	
narādhamān
—the	lowest	of	mankind;
kṣipāmi—
put;	
ajasram—
innumerable;	
aśubhān—
inauspicious;	
āsurīṣu
—
demoniac;	
eva—
certainly;	
yoniṣu
—in	the	wombs.
TRANSLATION
Those	who	are	envious	and	mischievous,	who	are	the	lowest	amongmen,	are	cast	by	Me	into	the	ocean	of	material	existence,	into	various
demoniac	species	of	life.
PURPORT
In	this	verse	it	is	clearly	indicated	that	the	placing	of	a	particular	individual
soul	in	a	particular	body	is	the	prerogative	of	the	supreme	will.	The	demoniac
person	may	not	agree	to	accept	the	supremacy	of	the	Lord,	and	it	is	a	fact	that
he	may	act	according	to	his	own	whims,	but	his	next	birth	will	depend	upon
the	decision	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	and	not	on	himself.	In	the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,	
Third	Canto,	it	is	stated	that	an	individual	soul,	after	his
death,	is	put	into	the	womb	of	a	mother	where	he	gets	a	particular	type	of
body	under	the	supervision	of	superior	power.	Therefore	in	the	material
existence	we	find	so	many	species	of	life–animals,	insects,	men,	and	so	on.
All	are	arranged	by	the	superior	power.	They	are	not	accidental.	As	for	the
demoniac,	it	is	clearly	said	here	that	they	are	perpetually	put	into	the	wombs
of	demons,	and	thus	they	continue	to	be	envious,	the	lowest	of	mankind.	Such
demoniac	species	of	life	are	held	to	be	always	full	of	lust,	always	violent	and
hateful	and	always	unclean.	They	are	just	like	so	many	beasts	in	a	jungle.
TEXT	20
आ स ु र ी ं
	
य ो ि न म ा प ᇳ न ा
	
म ू ढ ा
	
ज ᇳ म ि न ज ᇳ म ि न
	
।
म ा म प ् र ा ᇴ य ै व
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
त त ो
	
य ा ᇳ ᇰ य ध म ा ं
	
ग ि त म ्
	
॥
२ ०
॥
āsurīṁ	yonim	āpannā
mūḍhā	janmani	janmani
mām	aprāpyaiva	kaunteya
tato	yānty	adhamāṁ	gatim
āsurīm—
demoniac;	
yonim—
species;	
āpannāḥ—
gaining;	
mūḍhāḥ—
the
foolish;	
janmani	janmani—
in	birth	after	birth;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
aprāpya—
without	achieving;	
eva—
certainly;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of	Kuntī;	
tataḥ—
thereafter;	
yānti—
goes;	
adhamām—
condemned;	
gatim—
destination.
TRANSLATIONAttaining	repeated	birth	amongst	the	species	of	demoniac	life,	such
persons	can	never	approach	Me.	Gradually	they	sink	down	to	the	most
abominable	type	of	existence.
PURPORT
It	is	known	that	God	is	all-merciful,	but	here	we	find	that	God	is	never
merciful	to	the	demoniac.	It	is	clearly	stated	that	the	demoniac	people,	life
after	life,	are	put	into	the	wombs	of	similar	demons,	and,	not	achieving	the
mercy	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	they	go	down	and	down,	so	that	at	last	they
achieve	bodies	like	those	of	cats,	dogs	and	hogs.	It	is	clearly	stated	that	such
demons	have	practically	no	chance	of	receiving	the	mercy	of	God	at	any	stage
of	later	life.	In	the	
Vedas	
also	it	is	stated	that	such	persons	gradually	sink	to
become	dogs	and	hogs.	It	may	be	then	argued	in	this	connection	that	God
should	not	be	advertised	as	all-merciful	if	He	is	not	merciful	to	such	demons.
In	answer	to	this	question,	in	the	
Vedānta-sūtra	
we	find	that	the	Supreme	Lord
has	no	hatred	for	anyone.	The	placing	of	the	
asuras,	
the	demons,	in	the	lowest
status	of	life	is	simply	another	feature	of	His	mercy.	Sometimes	the	
asuras	
are
killed	by	the	Supreme	Lord,	but	this	killing	is	also	good	for	them,	for	in	Vedic
literature	we	find	that	anyone	who	is	killed	by	the	Supreme	Lord	becomes
liberated.	There	are	instances	in	history	of	many	
asuras—
Rāvaṇa,	Kaṁsa,
Hiraṇyakaśipu
—
to	whom	the	Lord	appeared	in	various	incarnations	just	to
kill.	Therefore	God's	mercy	is	shown	to	the	
asuras	
if	they	are	fortunate
enough	to	be	killed	by	Him.
TEXT	21
ि त ् र ि व ध ं
	
न र क ᇿ य े द ं
	
ሲ ा र ं
	
न ा श न म ा ᇰ म न ः
	
।
क ा म ः
	
क ् र ो ध ᇿ त थ ा
	
ल ो भ ᇿ त ᇿ म ा द े त ቓ र य ं
	
ᇰ य ज े त ्
	
॥
२ १
॥
tri-vidhaṁ	narakasyedaṁ
dvāraṁ	nāśanam	ātmanaḥ
kāmaḥ	krodhas	tathā	lobhas
tasmād	etat	trayaṁ	tyajet
tri-vidham—
three	kinds	of;	
narakasya—
hellish;	
idam—
this;	
dvāram—
gate;nāśanam—
destructive;	
ātmanaḥ—
of	the	self;	
kāmaḥ—
lust;	
krodhaḥ—
anger;
tathā—
as	well	as;	
lobhaḥ—
greed;	
tasmāt—
therefore;	
etat—
these;	
trayam—
three;	
tyajet—
must	give	up.
TRANSLATION
There	are	three	gates	leading	to	this	hell–lust,	anger,	and	greed.	Every
sane	man	should	give	these	up,	for	they	lead	to	the	degradation	of	the
soul.
PURPORT
The	beginning	of	demoniac	life	is	described	herein.	One	tries	to	satisfy	his
lust,	and	when	he	cannot,	anger	and	greed	arise.	A	sane	man	who	does	not
want	to	glide	down	to	the	species	of	demoniac	life	must	try	to	give	up	these
three	enemies	which	can	kill	the	self	to	such	an	extent	that	there	will	be	no
possibility	of	liberation	from	this	material	entanglement.
TEXT	22
ए त ै ि व ᆼ म ु ᇧ त ः
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
त म ो ሲ ा र ै ि ᇿ त ् र ि भ न ᆼ र ः
	
।
आ च र ᇰ य ा ᇰ म न ः
	
श ् र े य ᇿ त त ो
	
य ा ि त
	
प र ा ं
	
ग ि त म ्
	
॥
२ २
॥
etair	vimuktaḥ	kaunteya
tamo-dvārais	tribhir	naraḥ
ācaraty	ātmanaḥ	śreyas
tato	yāti	parāṁ	gatim
etaiḥ—
by	these;	
vimuktaḥ—
being	liberated;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of	Kuntī;
tamaḥ-dvāraiḥ—
the	gates	of	ignorance;	
tribhiḥ—
three	kinds	of;	
naraḥ—
a
person;	
ācarati—
performs	;	
ātmanaḥ—
self;	
śreyaḥ—
benediction;	
tataḥ
—
thereafter;	
yāti—
goes;	
parām—
supreme;	
gatim—
destination.
TRANSLATION
The	man	who	has	escaped	these	three	gates	of	hell,	O	son	of	Kuntī,performs	acts	conducive	to	self-realization	and	thus	gradually	attains	the
supreme	destination.
PURPORT
One	should	be	very	careful	of	these	three	enemies	to	human	life:	lust,	anger,
and	greed.	The	more	a	person	is	freed	from	lust,	anger	and	greed,	the	more	his
existence	becomes	pure.	Then	he	can	follow	the	rules	and	regulations	enjoined
in	the	Vedic	literature.	By	following	the	regulative	principles	of	human	life,
one	gradually	raises	himself	to	the	platform	of	spiritual	realization.	If	one	is	so
fortunate,	by	such	practice,	to	rise	to	the	platform	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,
then	success	is	guaranteed	for	him.	In	the	Vedic	literature,	the	ways	of	action
and	reaction	are	prescribed	to	enable	one	to	come	to	the	stage	of	purification.
The	whole	method	is	based	on	giving	up	lust,	greed	and	anger.	By	cultivating
knowledge	of	this	process,	one	can	be	elevated	to	the	highest	position	of	self-
realization;	this	self-realization	is	perfected	in	devotional	service.	In	that
devotional	service,	the	liberation	of	the	conditioned	soul	is	guaranteed.
Therefore,	according	to	the	Vedic	system,	there	are	instituted	the	four	orders
of	life	and	the	four	statuses	of	life,	called	the	caste	system	and	the	spiritual
order	system.	There	are	different	rules	and	regulations	for	different	castes	or
divisions	of	society,	and	if	a	person	is	able	to	follow	them,	he	will	be
automatically	raised	to	the	highest	platform	of	spiritual	realization.	Then	he
can	have	liberation	without	a	doubt.
TEXT	23
य ः
	
श ा ᇿ त ् र ि व ि ध म ु ᇰ स ृ ᇬ य
	
व त ᆼ त े
	
क ा म क ा र त ः
	
।
न
	
स
	
ि स द ् ि ध म व ा ᇴ न ो ि त
	
न
	
स ु ख ं
	
न
	
प र ा ं
	
ग ि त म ्
	
॥
२ ३
॥
yaḥ	śāstra-vidhim	utsṛjya
vartate	kāma-kārataḥ
na	sa	siddhim	avāpnoti
na	sukhaṁ	na	parāṁ	gatim
yaḥ—
anyone;	
śāstra-vidhim—
the	regulations	of	the	scriptures;	
utsṛjya
—
giving	up;	
vartate—
remains;	
kāma-kārataḥ—
acting	whimsically	in	lust;	
na
—	
never;	
saḥ—
he;	
siddhim—
perfection;	
avāpnoti—
achieves;	
na—
never;sukham	—
happiness;	
na
—never;	
parām
—the	supreme;	
gatim
—perfectional
stage.
TRANSLATION
But	he	who	discards	scriptural	injunctions	and	acts	according	to	his
own	whims	attains	neither	perfection,	nor	happiness,	nor	the	supreme
destination.
PURPORT
As	described	before,	the	
śāstra-vidhim,	
or	the	direction	of	the	
śāstra,
	is
given	to	the	different	castes	and	orders	of	human	society.	Everyone	is
expected	to	follow	these	rules	and	regulations.	If	one	does	not	follow	them
and	acts	whimsically	according	to	his	lust,	greed	and	desire,	then	he	never	will
be	perfect	in	his	life.	In	other	words,	a	man	may	theoretically	know	all	these
things,	but	if	he	does	not	apply	them	in	his	own	life,	then	he	is	to	be	known	as
the	lowest	of	mankind.	In	the	human	form	of	life,	a	living	entity	is	expected	to
be	sane	and	to	follow	the	regulations	given	for	elevating	his	life	to	the	highest
platform,	but	if	he	does	not	follow	them,	then	he	degrades	himself.	But	even	if
he	follows	the	rules	and	regulations	and	moral	principles	and	ultimately	does
not	come	to	the	stage	of	understanding	the	Supreme	Lord,	then	all	his
knowledge	becomes	spoiled.	Therefore	one	should	gradually	raise	himself	to
the	platform	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and	devotional	service;	it	is	then	and
there	that	he	can	attain	the	highest	perfectional	stage,	not	otherwise.
The	word	
kāma-cārataḥ	
is	very	significant.	A	person	who	knowingly
violates	the	rules	acts	in	lust.	He	knows	that	this	is	forbidden,	still	he	acts.
This	is	called	acting	whimsically.	He	knows	that	this	should	be	done,	but	still
he	does	not	do	it;	therefore	he	is	called	whimsical.	Such	persons	are	destined
to	be	condemned	by	the	Supreme	Lord.	Such	persons	cannot	have	the
perfection	which	is	meant	for	the	human	life.	The	human	life	is	especially
meant	for	purifying	one's	existence,	and	one	who	does	not	follow	the	rules	and
regulations	cannot	purify	himself,	nor	can	he	attain	the	real	stage	of	happiness.
TEXT	24
त ᇿ म ा ᇫ छ ा ᇿ त ् र ं
	
प ् र म ा ण ं
	
त े
	
क ा य ा ᆼ क ा य ᆼ ᇼ य व ि ᇿ थ त ौ
	
।ᇥ ा ᇰ व ा
	
श ा ᇿ त ् र ि व ध ा न ो ᇧ त ं
	
क म ᆼ
	
क त ु ᆼ ि म ह ा ह ᆼ ि स
	
॥
२ ४
॥
tasmāc	chāstraṁ	pramāṇaṁ	te
kāryākārya-vyavasthitau
jñātvā	śāstra-vidhānoktaṁ
karma	kartum	ihārhasi
tasmāt—
therefore;	
śāstram—
scriptures;	
pramāṇam—
evidence;	
te—
your;
kārya—
duty;	
akārya—
forbidden	activities;	
vyavasthitau—
in	determining;
jñātvā—
knowing;	
śāstra—
of	scripture;	
vidhāna—
regulations;	
uktam—
as
declared;	
karma—
work;	
kartum—
to	do;	
iha	arhasi
—you	should	do	it.
TRANSLATION
One	should	understand	what	is	duty	and	what	is	not	duty	by	the
regulations	of	the	scriptures.	Knowing	such	rules	and	regulations,	one
should	act	so	that	he	may	gradually	be	elevated.
PURPORT
As	stated	in	the	Fifteenth	Chapter,	all	the	rules	and	regulations	of	the	
Vedas
are	meant	for	knowing	Kṛṣṇa.	If	one	understands	Kṛṣṇa	from	the	
Bhagavad-
gītā	
and	becomes	situated	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	engaging	himself	in
devotional	service,	he	has	reached	the	highest	perfection	of	knowledge	offered
by	the	Vedic	literature.	Lord	Caitanya	Mahāprabhu	made	this	process	very
easy:	He	asked	people	simply	to	chant	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Hare	Kṛṣṇa,	Kṛṣṇa	Kṛṣṇa,
Hare	Hare/	Hare	Rāma,	Hare	Rāma,	Rāma	Rāma,	Hare	Hare	and	to	engage	in
the	devotional	service	of	the	Lord	and	eat	the	remnants	of	foodstuff	offered	to
the	Deity.	One	who	is	directly	engaged	in	all	these	devotional	activities	is	to
be	understood	as	having	studied	all	Vedic	literature.	He	has	come	to	the
conclusion	perfectly.	Of	course,	for	the	ordinary	persons	who	are	not	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	or	who	are	not	engaged	in	devotional	service,	what	is	to	be
done	and	what	is	not	to	be	done	must	be	decided	by	the	injunctions	of	the
Vedas.	
One	should	act	accordingly,	without	argument.	That	is	called	following
the	principles	of	
śāstra,	
or	scripture.	
Śāstra	
is	without	the	four	principal
defects	that	are	visible	in	the	conditioned	soul:	imperfect	senses,	the
propensity	for	cheating,	certainty	of	committing	mistakes,	and	certainty	ofbeing	illusioned.	These	four	principal	defects	in	conditioned	life	disqualify
one	from	putting	forth	rules	and	regulations.	Therefore,	the	rules	and
regulations	as	described	in	the	
śāstra
—being	above	these	defects—are
accepted	without	alteration	by	all	great	saints,	
ācāryas,	
and	great	souls.
In	India	there	are	many	parties	of	spiritual	understanding,	generally
classified	as	two:	the	impersonalist	and	the	personalist.	Both	of	them,
however,	lead	their	lives	according	to	the	principles	of	the	
Vedas.	
Without
following	the	principles	of	the	scriptures,	one	cannot	elevate	himself	to	the
perfectional	stage.	One	who	actually,	therefore,	understands	the	purport	of	the
śāstras	
is	considered	fortunate.
In	human	society,	aversion	to	the	principles	of	understanding	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead	is	the	cause	of	all	falldowns.	That	is	the	greatest
offense	of	human	life.	Therefore,	
māyā
,	the	material	energy	of	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	is	always	giving	us	trouble	in	the	shape	of	the
threefold	miseries.	This	material	energy	is	constituted	of	the	three	modes	of
material	nature.	One	has	to	raise	himself	at	least	to	the	mode	of	goodness
before	the	path	to	understanding	the	Supreme	Lord	can	be	opened.	Without
raising	oneself	to	the	standard	of	the	mode	of	goodness,	one	remains	in
ignorance	and	passion,	which	are	the	cause	of	demoniac	life.	Those	in	the
modes	of	passion	and	ignorance	deride	the	scriptures,	deride	the	holy	man,
and	deride	the	proper	understanding	of	the	spiritual	master,	and	they	do	not
care	for	the	regulations	of	the	scriptures.	In	spite	of	hearing	the	glories	of
devotional	service,	they	are	not	attracted.	Thus	they	manufacture	their	own
way	of	elevation.	These	are	some	of	the	defects	of	human	society,	which	lead
to	the	demoniac	status	of	life.	If,	however,	one	is	able	to	be	guided	by	a	proper
and	bona	fide	spiritual	master,	who	can	lead	one	to	the	path	of	elevation,	to	the
higher	stage,	then	one's	life	becomes	successful.
Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	Sixteenth	Chapter	of	the
Śrīmad-Bhagavad-gītā
	in	the	matter	of	the	Divine	and	Demoniac	Natures.Chapter-17
CHAPTER	SEVENTEEN
The	Divisions	of	Faith
TEXT	1
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
य े
	
श ा ᇿ त ् र ि व ि ध म ु ᇰ स ृ ᇬ य
	
य ज ᇳ त े
	
श ् र ሬ य ा ि ᇳ व त ा ः
	
।
त े ष ा ं
	
ि न ᇾ ठ ा
	
त ु
	
क ा
	
क ृ ᇾ ण
	
स ᇰ ᇰ व म ा ह ो
	
र ज ᇿ त म ः
	
॥
१
॥
arjuna	uvāca
ye	śāstra-vidhim	utsṛjya
yajante	śraddhayānvitāḥteṣāṁ	niṣṭhā	tu	kā	kṛṣṇa
sattvam	āho	rajas	tamaḥ
arjunaḥ	uvāca—
Arjuna	said;	
ye—
those;	
śāstra-vidhim—
the	regulations	of
scripture;	
utsṛjya—
giving	up;	
yajante—
worships;	
śraddhayā—
full	faith;
anvitāḥ—
possessed	of;	
teṣām—
of	them;	
niṣṭhā—
faith;	
tu—
but;	
kā
—what	is
that;	
kṛṣṇa
—O	Kṛṣṇa;	
sattvam—
in	goodness;	
āho—
said;	
rajaḥ—
in	passion;
tamaḥ—
in	ignorance.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	said,	O	Kṛṣṇa,	what	is	the	situation	of	one	who	does	not	follow
the	principles	of	scripture	but	worships	according	to	his	own
imagination?	Is	he	in	goodness,	in	passion	or	in	ignorance?
PURPORT
In	the	Fourth	Chapter,	thirty-ninth	verse,	it	is	said	that	a	person	faithful	to	a
particular	type	of	worship	gradually	becomes	elevated	to	the	stage	of
knowledge	and	attains	the	highest	perfectional	stage	of	peace	and	prosperity.
In	the	Sixteenth	Chapter,	it	is	concluded	that	one	who	does	not	follow	the
principles	laid	down	in	the	scriptures	is	called	an	
asura
,	demon,	and	one	who
follows	the	scriptural	injunctions	faithfully	is	called	a	
deva
,	or	demigod.	Now,
if	one,	with	faith,	follows	some	rules	which	are	not	mentioned	in	the	scriptural
injunctions,	what	is	his	position?	This	doubt	of	Arjuna	is	to	be	cleared	by
Kṛṣṇa.	Are	those	who	create	some	sort	of	God	by	selecting	a	human	being	and
placing	their	faith	in	him	worshiping	in	goodness,	passion	or	ignorance?	Do
such	persons	attain	the	perfectional	stage	of	life?	Is	it	possible	for	them	to	be
situated	in	real	knowledge	and	elevate	themselves	to	the	highest	perfectional
stage?	Do	those	who	do	not	follow	the	rules	and	regulations	of	the	scriptures
but	who	have	faith	in	something	and	worship	gods	and	demigods	and	men
attain	success	in	their	effort?	Arjuna	is	putting	these	questions	to	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	2श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
ि त ् र ि व ध ा
	
भ व ि त
	
श ् र ሬ ा
	
द े ि ह न ा ं
	
स ा
	
ᇿ व भ ा व ज ा
	
।
स ा ि ᇰ ᇰ व क ी
	
र ा ज स ी
	
च ै व
	
त ा म स ी
	
च े ि त
	
त ा ं
	
श ृ ण ु
	
॥
२
॥
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
tri-vidhā	bhavati	śraddhā
dehināṁ	sā	svabhāva-jā
sāttvikī	rājasī	caiva
tāmasī	ceti	tāṁ	śṛṇu
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
tri-vidhā—
three	kinds;	
bhavati
—become;	
śraddhā—
faith;	
dehinām
—of	the	embodied;	
sā
—that;	
sva-bhāva-jā—
according	to	his	mode	of	material	nature;	
sāttvikī
—
mode	of	goodness;	
rājasī—
mode	of	passion;	
ca—
also;	
eva—
certainly;	
tāmasī
—
mode	of	ignorance;	
ca—
and;	
iti—
thus;	
tām—
that;	
sṛṇu—
hear	from	Me.
TRANSLATION
The	Supreme	Lord	said,	according	to	the	modes	of	nature	acquired	by
the	embodied	soul,	one's	faith	can	be	of	three	kinds–goodness,	passion	or
ignorance.	Now	hear	about	these.
PURPORT
Those	who	know	the	rules	and	regulations	of	the	scriptures,	but,	out	of
laziness	or	indolence,	give	up	following	these	rules	and	regulations,	are
governed	by	the	modes	of	material	nature.	According	to	their	previous
activities	in	the	modes	of	goodness,	passion	or	ignorance,	they	acquire	a
nature	which	is	of	a	specific	quality.	The	association	of	the	living	entity	with
the	different	modes	of	nature	has	been	going	on	perpetually	since	the	living
entity	is	in	contact	with	material	nature.	Thus	he	acquires	different	types	of
mentality	according	to	his	association	with	the	material	modes.	But	this	nature
can	be	changed	if	one	associates	with	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master	and	abides
by	his	rules	and	the	scriptures.	Gradually,	one	can	change	his	position	from
ignorance	to	goodness,	or	from	passion	to	goodness.	The	conclusion	is	that
blind	faith	in	a	particular	mode	of	nature	cannot	help	a	person	becomeelevated	to	the	perfectional	stage.	One	has	to	consider	things	carefully,	with
intelligence,	in	the	association	of	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master.	Thus	one	can
change	his	position	to	a	higher	mode	of	nature.
TEXT	3
स ᇰ ᇰ व ा न ु ኅ प ा
	
स व ᆼ ᇿ य
	
श ् र ሬ ा
	
भ व ि त
	
भ ा र त
	
।
श ् र ሬ ा म य ो ऽ य ं
	
प ु ኄ ष ो
	
य ो
	
य ᇫ छ ् र ሬ ः
	
स
	
ए व
	
स ः
	
॥
३
॥
sattvānurūpā	sarvasya
śraddhā	bhavati	bhārata
śraddhā-mayo	'yaṁ	puruṣo
yo	yac-chraddhaḥ	sa	eva	saḥ
sattva-anurūpā—
according	to	the	existence;	
sarvasya—
of	everyone;
śraddhā—
faith;	
bhavati—
becomes;	
bhārata
—O	son	of	Bhārata;	
śraddhā—
faith;	
mayaḥ—
full;	
ayam—
this;	
puruṣaḥ—
living	entity;	
yaḥ—
anyone;	
yat—
that;	
śraddhaḥ—
faith;	
saḥ—
that;	
eva—
certainly;	
saḥ—
he.
TRANSLATION
According	to	one's	existence	under	the	various	modes	of	nature,	one
evolves	a	particular	kind	of	faith.	The	living	being	is	said	to	be	of	a
particular	faith	according	to	the	modes	he	has	acquired.
PURPORT
Everyone	has	a	particular	type	of	faith,	regardless	of	what	he	is.	But	his
faith	is	considered	good,	passionate	or	ignorant	according	to	the	nature	he	has
acquired.	Thus,	according	to	his	particular	type	of	faith,	one	associates	with
certain	persons.	Now	the	real	fact	is	that	every	living	being,	as	is	stated	in	the
Fifteenth	Chapter,	is	originally	the	fragmental	part	and	parcel	of	the	Supreme
Lord.	Therefore	one	is	originally	transcendental	to	all	the	modes	of	material
nature.	But	when	one	forgets	his	relationship	with	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead	and	comes	into	contact	with	the	material	nature	in	conditional	life,he	generates	his	own	position	by	association	with	the	different	varieties	of
material	nature.	The	resultant	artificial	faith	and	existence	are	only	material.
Although	one	may	be	conducted	by	some	impression,	or	some	conception	of
life,	still,	originally,	he	is	
nirguṇa,	
or	transcendental.	Therefore	one	has	to
become	cleansed	of	the	material	contamination	that	he	has	acquired	in	order	to
regain	his	relationship	with	the	Supreme	Lord.	That	is	the	only	path	back
without	fear:	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	If	one	is	situated	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,
then	that	path	is	guaranteed	for	his	elevation	to	the	perfectional	stage.	If	one
does	not	take	to	this	path	of	self-realization,	then	he	is	surely	to	be	conducted
by	the	influence	of	the	modes	of	nature.
The	word	
sattva,	
or	faith,	is	very	significant	in	this	verse.	
Sattva	
or	faith
always	comes	out	of	the	works	of	goodness.	One's	faith	may	be	in	a	demigod
or	some	created	God	or	some	mental	concoction.	It	is	supposed	to	be	one's
strong	faith	in	something	that	is	productive	of	the	works	of	material	goodness.
But	in	material	conditional	life,	no	works	of	material	nature	are	completely
purified.	They	are	mixed.	They	are	not	in	pure	goodness.	Pure	goodness	is
transcendental;	in	purified	goodness	one	can	understand	the	real	nature	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	As	long	as	one's	faith	is	not	completely	in
purified	goodness,	the	faith	is	subject	to	contamination	by	any	of	the	modes	of
material	nature.	The	contaminated	modes	of	material	nature	expand	to	the
heart.	Therefore	according	to	the	position	of	the	heart	in	contact	with	a
particular	mode	of	material	nature,	one's	faith	is	established.	It	should	be
understood,	that	if	one's	heart	is	in	the	mode	of	goodness,	his	faith	is	also	in
the	mode	of	goodness.	If	his	heart	is	in	the	mode	of	passion,	his	faith	is	also	in
the	mode	of	passion.	And	if	his	heart	is	in	the	mode	of	darkness,	illusion,	his
faith	is	also	thus	contaminated.	Thus	we	find	different	types	of	faith	in	this
world,	and	there	are	different	types	of	religions	due	to	different	types	of	faith.
The	real	principle	of	religious	faith	is	situated	in	the	mode	of	pure	goodness,
but	because	the	heart	is	tainted,	we	find	different	types	of	religious	principles.
Thus	according	to	different	types	of	faith,	there	are	different	kinds	of	worship.
TEXT	4
य ज ᇳ त े
	
स ा ि ᇰ ᇰ व क ा
	
द े व ा ᇳ य ᇤ र ᇤ ा ं ि स
	
र ा ज स ा ः
	
।
प ् र े त ा ᇳ भ ू त ग ण ा ं ᇽ च ा ᇳ य े
	
य ज ᇳ त े
	
त ा म स ा
	
ज न ा ः
	
॥
४
॥yajante	sāttvikā	devān
yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi	rājasāḥ
pretān	bhūta-gaṇāṁś	cānye
yajante	tāmasā	janāḥ
yajante—
worship;	
sāttvikāḥ—
those	who	are	in	the	mode	of	goodness;
devān—
demigods;	
yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi	rājasāḥ—
those	who	are	in	the	mode	of
passion	worship	demons;	
pretān
—dead	spirits;	
bhūta-gaṇān—
ghosts;	
ca	anye
—and	others;	
yajante
—worship;	
tāmasāḥ—
in	the	mode	of	ignorance;	
janāḥ
—people.
TRANSLATION
Men	in	the	mode	of	goodness	worship	the	demigods;	those	in	the	mode
of	passion	worship	the	demons;	and	those	in	the	mode	of	ignorance
worship	ghosts	and	spirits.
PURPORT
In	this	verse	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	describes	different	kinds
of	worshipers	according	to	their	external	activities.	According	to	scriptural
injunction,	only	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is	worshipable,	but	those
who	are	not	very	conversant	with,	or	faithful	to,	the	scriptural	injunctions
worship	different	objects,	according	to	their	specific	situations	in	the	modes	of
material	nature.	Those	who	are	situated	in	goodness	generally	worship	the
demigods.	The	demigods	include	Brahmā,	Śiva	and	others	such	as	Indra,
Candra	and	the	sun-god.	There	are	various	demigods.	Those	in	goodness
worship	a	particular	demigod	for	a	particular	purpose.	Similarly,	those	who
are	in	the	mode	of	passion	worship	the	demons.	We	recall	that	during	the
Second	World	War,	a	man	in	Calcutta	worshiped	Hitler	because	thanks	to	that
war	he	had	amassed	a	large	amount	of	wealth	by	dealing	in	the	black	market.
Similarly,	those	in	the	modes	of	passion	and	ignorance	generally	select	a
powerful	man	to	be	God.	They	think	that	anyone	can	be	worshiped	as	God	and
that	the	same	results	will	be	obtained.
Now,	it	is	clearly	described	here	that	those	who	are	in	the	mode	of	passion
worship	and	create	such	gods,	and	those	who	are	in	the	mode	of	ignorance,	indarkness,	worship	dead	spirits.	Sometimes	people	worship	at	the	tomb	of
some	dead	man.	Sexual	service	is	also	considered	to	be	in	the	mode	of
darkness.	Similarly,	in	remote	villages	in	India	there	are	worshipers	of	ghosts.
We	have	seen	that	in	India	the	lower	class	people	sometimes	go	to	the	forest,
and	if	they	have	knowledge	that	a	ghost	lives	in	a	tree,	they	worship	that	tree
and	offer	sacrifices.	These	different	kinds	of	worship	are	not	actually	God
worship.	God	worship	is	for	persons	who	are	transcendentally	situated	in	pure
goodness.	In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
it	is	said,	
sattvaṁ	viśuddham	vāsudeva-
śabditam.	
"When	a	man	is	situated	in	pure	goodness,	he	worships	Vāsudeva."
The	purport	is	that	those	who	are	completely	purified	of	the	material	modes	of
nature	and	who	are	transcendentally	situated	can	worship	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead.
The	impersonalists	are	supposed	to	be	situated	in	the	mode	of	goodness,
and	they	worship	five	kinds	of	demigods.	They	worship	the	impersonal	Viṣṇu,
or	Viṣṇu	form	in	the	material	world,	which	is	known	as	philosophized	Viṣṇu.
Viṣṇu	is	the	expansion	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	but	the
impersonalists,	because	they	do	not	ultimately	believe	in	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	imagine	that	the	Viṣṇu	form	is	just	another	aspect	of
the	impersonal	Brahman;	similarly,	they	imagine	that	Lord	Brahmā	is	the
impersonal	form	in	the	material	mode	of	passion.	Thus	they	sometimes
describe	five	kinds	of	gods	that	are	worshipable,	but	because	they	think	that
the	actual	truth	is	impersonal	Brahman,	they	dispose	of	all	worshipable
objects	at	the	ultimate	end.	In	conclusion,	the	different	qualities	of	the	material
modes	of	nature	can	be	purified	through	association	with	persons	who	are	of
transcendental	nature.
TEXTS	5-6
अ श ा ᇿ त ् र ि व ि ह त ं
	
घ ो र ं
	
त ᇴ य ᇳ त े
	
य े
	
त प ो
	
ज न ा ः
	
।
द ᇸ भ ा ह ं क ा र स ं य ु ᇧ त ा ः
	
क ा म र ा ग ब ल ा ि ᇳ व त ा ः
	
॥
५
॥
क ष ᆼ य ᇳ त ः
	
श र ी र ᇿ थ ं
	
भ ू त ग ् र ा म म च े त स ः
	
।
म ा ं
	
च ै व ा ᇳ त ः श र ी र ᇿ थ ं
	
त ा ि ᇳ व ሬ ᆸ ा स ु र ि न ᇽ च य ा न ्
	
॥
६
॥
aśāstra-vihitaṁ	ghoraṁ
tapyante	ye	tapo	janāḥ
dambhāhaṅkāra-saṁyuktāḥkāma-rāga-balānvitāḥ
karṣayantaḥ	śarīra-sthaṁ
bhūta-grāmam	acetasaḥ
māṁ	caivāntaḥ	śarīra-sthaṁ
tān	viddhy	āsura-niścayān
aśāstra—
not	mentioned	in	the	scriptures;	
vihitam—
directed;	
ghoram—
harmful	to	others;	
tapyante—
undergo	penances;	
ye—
those;	
tapaḥ—
austerities;	
janāḥ—
persons;	
dambha—
pride;	
ahaṅkāra—
egotism;	
saṁyuktāḥ
—
engaged;	
kāma—
lust;
	rāga—
attachment;	
bala—
force;	
anvitāḥ
—impelled
by;	
karṣayantaḥ—
tormenting;	
śarīra-stham—
situated	within	the	body;
bhūtagrāmam—
combination	of	material	elements;	
acetasaḥ—
by	such	a
misled	mentality;	
mām—
to	Me;	
ca—
also;	
eva
—certainly;	
antaḥ—
within;
śarīra-stham	—
situated	in	the	body;	
tān—
them;	
viddhi—
understand;	
āsura
—
demons;	
niścayān—
certainly.
TRANSLATION
Those	who	undergo	severe	austerities	and	penances	not	recommended
in	the	scriptures,	performing	them	out	of	pride,	egotism,	lust	and
attachment,	who	are	impelled	by	passion	and	who	torture	their	bodily
organs	as	well	as	the	Supersoul	dwelling	within	are	to	be	known	as
demons.
PURPORT
There	are	persons	who	manufacture	modes	of	austerity	and	penances	which
are	not	mentioned	in	the	scriptural	injunctions.	For	instance,	fasting	for	some
ulterior	purpose,	such	as	to	promote	a	purely	political	end,	is	not	mentioned	in
the	scriptural	directions.	The	scriptures	recommend	fasting	for	spiritual
advancement,	not	for	some	political	end	or	social	purpose.	Persons	who	take
to	such	austerities	are,	according	to	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
certainly	demoniac.	Their
acts	are	against	the	scriptural	injunction	and	are	not	beneficial	for	the	people
in	general.	Actually,	they	act	out	of	pride,	false	ego,	lust	and	attachment	for
material	enjoyment.	By	such	activities,	not	only	are	the	combination	of
material	elements	of	which	the	body	is	constructed	disturbed,	but	also	theSupreme	Personality	of	Godhead	Himself	living	within	the	body.	Such
unauthorized	fasting	or	austerities	for	some	political	end	are	certainly	very
disturbing	to	others.	They	are	not	mentioned	in	the	Vedic	literature.	A
demoniac	person	may	think	that	he	can	force	his	enemy	or	other	parties	to
comply	with	his	desire	by	this	method,	but	sometimes	one	dies	by	such
fasting.	These	acts	are	not	approved	by	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
and	He	says	that	those	who	engage	in	them	are	demons.	Such	demonstrations
are	insults	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	because	they	are	enacted	in
disobedience	to	the	Vedic	scriptural	injunctions.	The	word	
acetasaḥ
	is
significant	in	this	connection–persons	of	normal	mental	condition	must	obey
the	scriptural	injunctions.	Those	who	are	not	in	such	a	position	neglect	and
disobey	the	scriptures	and	manufacture	their	own	way	of	austerities	and
penances.	One	should	always	remember	the	ultimate	end	of	the	demoniac
people,	as	described	in	the	previous	chapter.	The	Lord	forces	them	to	take
birth	in	the	womb	of	demoniac	persons.	Consequently	they	will	live	by
demoniac	principles	life	after	life	without	knowing	their	relationship	with	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	If,	however,	such	persons	are	fortunate
enough	to	be	guided	by	a	spiritual	master	who	can	direct	them	to	the	path	of
Vedic	wisdom,	they	can	get	out	of	this	entanglement	and	ultimately	achieve
the	supreme	goal.
TEXT	7
आ ह ा र ᇿ ᇰ व ि प
	
स व ᆼ ᇿ य
	
ि त ् र ि व ध ो
	
भ व ि त
	
ि प ् र य ः
	
।
य ᇥ ᇿ त प ᇿ त थ ा
	
द ा न ं
	
त े ष ा ं
	
भ े द ि म म ं
	
श ृ ण ु
	
॥
७
॥
āhāras	tv	api	sarvasya
tri-vidho	bhavati	priyaḥ
yajñas	tapas	tathā	dānaṁ
teṣāṁ	bhedam	imaṁ	śṛṇu
āhāraḥ—
eating;	
tu—
certainly;	
api—
also;	
sarvasya—
of	everyone;	
trividhaḥ
—
three	kinds;	
bhavati—
there	are;	
priyaḥ—
dear;	
yajñaḥ—
sacrifice;	
tapaḥ
—
austerity;	
tathā—
also;	
dānam—
charity;	
teṣām—
of	them;	
bhedam
—
differences;	
imam—
thus;	
śṛṇu
—hear.TRANSLATION
Even	food	of	which	all	partake	is	of	three	kinds,	according	to	the	three
modes	of	material	nature.	The	same	is	true	of	sacrifices,	austerities	and
charity.	Listen,	and	I	shall	tell	you	of	the	distinctions	of	these.
PURPORT
In	terms	of	different	situations	and	the	modes	of	material	nature,	there	are
differences	in	the	manner	of	eating,	performing	sacrifices,	austerities	and
charities.	They	are	not	all	conducted	on	the	same	level.	Those	who	can
understand	analytically	what	kind	of	performances	are	in	what	modes	of
material	nature	are	actually	wise;	those	who	consider	all	kinds	of	sacrifice	or
foods	or	charity	to	be	the	same	cannot	discriminate,	and	they	are	foolish.
There	are	missionary	workers	who	advocate	that	one	can	do	whatever	he	likes
and	attain	perfection.	But	these	foolish	guides	are	not	acting	according	to	the
direction	of	the	scripture.	They	are	manufacturing	ways	and	misleading	the
people	in	general.
TEXT	8-10
आ य ु ः स ᇰ ᇰ व ब ल ा र ो ᇩ य स ु ख प ् र ी ि त ि व व ध ᆼ न ा ः
	
।
र ᇿ य ा ः
	
ि ᇿ न ᇩ ध ा ः
	
ि ᇿ थ र ा
	
ᇦ ሱ ा
	
आ ह ा र ा ः
	
स ा ि ᇰ ᇰ व क ि प ् र य ा ः
	
॥
८
॥
क ट ् व ᇸ ल ल व ण ा ᇰ य ु ᇾ ण त ी ቎ ण ኅ ᇤ ि व द ा ि ह न ः
	
।
आ ह ा र ा
	
र ा ज स ᇿ य े ᇾ ट ा
	
द ु ः ख श ो क ा म य प ् र द ा ः
	
॥
९
॥
य ा त य ा म ं
	
ग त र स ं
	
प ू ि त
	
प य ु ᆼ ि ष त ं
	
च
	
य त ्
	
।
उ ि ᇫ छ ᇾ ट म ि प
	
च ा म े ᇲ य ं
	
भ ो ज न ं
	
त ा म स ि प ् र य म ्
	
॥
१ ०
॥
āyuḥ	sattva-balārogya-
sukha-prīti-vivardhanāḥ
rasyāḥ	snigdhāḥ	sthirā	hṛdyā
āhārāḥ	sāttvika-priyāḥ
kaṭv-amla-lavaṇāty-uṣṇa-
tīkṣṇa-rūkṣa-vidāhinaḥāhārā	rājasasyeṣṭā
duḥkha-śokāmaya-pradāḥ
yāta-yāmaṁ	gata-rasaṁ
pūti	paryuṣitaṁ	ca	yat
ucchiṣṭam	api	cāmedhyaṁ
bhojanaṁ	tāmasa-priyam
āyuḥ
—duration	of	life;	
sattva
—existence;	
bala
—strength;	
ārogya
—health;
sukha
—happiness;	
prīti
—satisfaction;	
vivardhanāḥ
—increasing;	
rasyāḥ
—
juicy;	
snigdhāḥ
—fatty;	
sthirāḥ
—enduring;	
hṛdyāḥ
—pleasing	to	the	heart;
āhārāḥ
—food;	
sāttvika
—goodness;	
priyāḥ
—palatable;	
kaṭu
—bitter;	
amla
—
sour;	
lavaṇa
—salty;	
ati-uṣṇa
—very	hot;	
tīkṣṇa
—pungent;	
rūkṣa
—dry;
vidāhinaḥ
—burning;	
āhārāḥ
—food;	
rājasasya
—in	the	mode	of	passion;	
iṣṭāḥ
—palatable;	
duḥkha
—distress;	
śoka
—misery;	
āmaya-pradāḥ
—causing
disease;;	
yāta-yāmam
—food	cooked	three	hours	before	being	eaten;	
gata-
rasam
—tasteless;	
pūti
—bad	smelling;	
paryuṣitam
—decomposed;	
ca
—also;
yat
—that	which;	
ucchiṣṭam
—remnants	of	food	eaten	by	others;	
api
—also;	
ca
—and;	
amedhyam
—untouchable;	
bhojanam
—eating;	
tāmasa
—to	one	in	the
mode	of	darkness;	
priyam
—dear.
TRANSLATION
Foods	in	the	mode	of	goodness	increase	the	duration	of	life,	purify	one's
existence	and	give	strength,	health,	happiness	and	satisfaction.	Such
nourishing	foods	are	sweet,	juicy,	fattening	and	palatable.	Foods	that	are
too	bitter,	too	sour,	salty,	pungent,	dry	and	hot,	are	liked	by	people	in	the
modes	of	passion.	Such	foods	cause	pain,	distress,	and	disease.	Food
cooked	more	than	three	hours	before	being	eaten,	which	is	tasteless,	stale,
putrid,	decomposed	and	unclean,	is	food	liked	by	people	in	the	mode	of
ignorance.
PURPORT
The	purpose	of	food	is	to	increase	the	duration	of	life,	purify	the	mind	and
aid	bodily	strength.	This	is	its	only	purpose.	In	the	past,	great	authorities
selected	those	foods	that	best	aid	health	and	increase	life's	duration,	such	asmilk	products,	sugar,	rice,	wheat,	fruits	and	vegetables.	These	foods	are	very
dear	to	those	in	the	mode	of	goodness.	Some	other	foods,	such	as	baked	corn
and	molasses,	while	not	very	palatable	in	themselves,	can	be	made	pleasant
when	mixed	with	milk	or	other	foods.	They	are	then	in	the	mode	of	goodness.
All	these	foods	are	pure	by	nature.	They	are	quite	distinct	from	untouchable
things	like	meat	and	liquor.	Fatty	foods,	as	mentioned	in	the	eighth	verse,	have
no	connection	with	animal	fat	obtained	by	slaughter.	Animal	fat	is	available	in
the	form	of	milk,	which	is	the	most	wonderful	of	all	foods.	Milk,	butter,
cheese	and	similar	products	give	animal	fat	in	a	form	which	rules	out	any	need
for	the	killing	of	innocent	creatures.	It	is	only	through	brute	mentality	that	this
killing	goes	on.	The	civilized	method	of	obtaining	needed	fat	is	by	milk.
Slaughter	is	the	way	of	subhumans.	Protein	is	amply	available	through	split
peas,	
dhall,	
whole	wheat,	etc.
Foods	in	the	mode	of	passion,	which	are	bitter,	too	salty,	or	too	hot	or
overly	mixed	with	red	pepper,	cause	misery	by	producing	mucous	in	the
stomach,	leading	to	disease.	Foods	in	the	mode	of	ignorance	or	darkness	are
essentially	those	that	are	not	fresh.	Any	food	cooked	more	than	three	hours
before	it	is	eaten	(except	
prasādam
,	food	offered	to	the	Lord)	is	considered	to
be	in	the	mode	of	darkness.	Because	they	are	decomposing,	such	foods	give	a
bad	odor,	which	often	attracts	people	in	this	mode	but	repulses	those	in	the
mode	of	goodness.
Remnants	of	food	may	be	eaten	only	when	they	are	part	of	a	meal	that	was
first	offered	to	the	Supreme	Lord	or	first	eaten	by	saintly	persons,	especially
the	spiritual	master.	Otherwise	the	remnants	of	food	are	considered	to	be	in
the	mode	of	darkness,	and	they	increase	infection	or	disease.	Such	foodstuffs,
although	very	palatable	to	persons	in	the	mode	of	darkness,	are	neither	liked
nor	even	touched	by	those	in	the	mode	of	goodness.	The	best	food	is	the
remnant	of	what	is	offered	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	In
Bhagavad-gītā	
the	Supreme	Lord	says	that	He	accepts	preparations	of
vegetables,	flour	and	milk	when	offered	with	devotion.	
Patraṁ	puṣpaṁ
phalaṁ	toyam.	
Of	course,	devotion	and	love	are	the	chief	things	which	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	accepts.	But	it	is	also	mentioned	that	the
prasādam	
should	be	prepared	in	a	particular	way.	Any	food	prepared	by	the
injunction	of	the	scripture	offered	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	can
be	taken	even	if	prepared	long,	long	ago,	because	such	food	is	transcendental.
Therefore	to	make	food	antiseptic,	eatable	and	palatable	for	all	persons,	one
should	offer	food	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.TEXT	11
अ फ ल ा क ा ङ ् ि ᇤ ि भ य ᆼ ᇥ ो
	
ि व ि ध द ृ ᇾ ट ो
	
य
	
इ ᇬ य त े
	
।
य ᇾ ट ᇼ य म े व े ि त
	
म न ः
	
स म ा ध ा य
	
स
	
स ा ि ᇰ ᇰ व क ः
	
॥
१ १
॥
aphalākāṇkṣibhir	yajño
vidhi-dṛṣṭo	ya	ijyate
yaṣṭavyam	eveti	manaḥ
samādhāya	sa	sāttvikaḥ
aphala-kāñkṣibhiḥ—
devoid	of	desire	for	result;	
yajñaḥ—
sacrifice;	
vidhi—
accordingly;
	dṛṣtaḥ—
direction;	
yaḥ
—anyone;	
ijyate
—performs;	
yaṣṭavyam	
—
must	be	performed;	
eva—
certainly;	
iti—
thus;	
manaḥ—
mind;	
samādhāya—
fixed	in;	
saḥ—
he;	
sāttvikaḥ—
is	in	the	mode	of	goodness.
TRANSLATION
Of	sacrifices,	that	sacrifice	performed	according	to	duty	and	to
scriptural	rules,	and	with	no	expectation	of	reward,	is	of	the	nature	of
goodness.
PURPORT
The	general	tendency	is	to	offer	sacrifice	with	some	purpose	in	mind,	but
here	it	is	stated	that	sacrifice	should	be	performed	without	any	such	desire.	It
should	be	done	as	a	matter	of	duty.	Take,	for	example,	the	performance	of
rituals	in	temples	or	in	churches.	Generally	they	are	performed	with	the
purpose	of	material	benefit,	but	that	is	not	in	the	mode	of	goodness.	One
should	go	to	a	temple	or	church	as	a	matter	of	duty,	offer	respect	to	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	and	offer	flowers	and	eatables.	Everyone
thinks	that	there	is	no	use	in	going	to	the	temple	just	to	worship	God.	But
worship	for	economic	benefit	is	not	recommended	in	the	scriptural	injunction.
One	should	go	simply	to	offer	respect	to	the	Deity.	That	will	place	one	in	the
mode	of	goodness.	It	is	the	duty	of	every	civilized	man	to	obey	the	injunctions
of	the	scriptures	and	offer	respect	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.TEXT	12
अ ि भ स ᇳ ध ा य
	
त ु
	
फ ल ं
	
द ᇸ भ ा थ ᆼ म ि प
	
च ै व
	
य त ्
	
।
इ ᇬ य त े
	
भ र त श ् र े ᇾ ठ
	
त ं
	
य ᇥ ं
	
ि व द ् ि ध
	
र ा ज स म ्
	
॥
१ २
॥
abhisandhāya	tu	phalaṁ
dambhārtham	api	caiva	yat
ijyate	bharata-śreṣṭha
taṁ	yajñaṁ	viddhi	rājasam
abhisandhāya—
desiring;	
tu—
but;	
phalam—
the	result;	
dambha—
pride;
artham—
material	benefits;	
api—
also;	
ca—
and;	
eva—
certainly;	
yat
—that
which;	
ijyate—
worship;	
bharata-śreṣṭha
—O	chief	of	the	Bhāratas;	
tam—	
that;
yajñam
—sacrifice;	
viddhi—
know;	
rājasam
—in	the	mode	of	passion.
TRANSLATION
But	that	sacrifice	performed	for	some	material	end	or	benefit	or
performed	ostentatiously,	out	of	pride,	is	of	the	nature	of	passion,	O	chief
of	the	Bhāratas.
PURPORT
Sometimes	sacrifices	and	rituals	are	performed	for	elevation	to	the	heavenly
kingdom	or	for	some	material	benefits	in	this	world.	Such	sacrifices	or
ritualistic	performances	are	considered	to	be	in	the	mode	of	passion.
TEXT	13
ि व ि ध ह ी न म स ृ ᇾ ट ा ᇳ न ं
	
म ᇳ त ् र ह ी न म द ि ᇤ ण म ्
	
।
श ् र ሬ ा ि व र ि ह त ं
	
य ᇥ ं
	
त ा म स ं
	
प ि र च ᇤ त े
	
॥
१ ३
॥
vidhi-hīnam	asṛṣṭānnaṁ
mantra-hīnam	adakṣiṇam
śraddhā-virahitaṁ	yajñamtāmasaṁ	paricakṣate
vidhi-hīnam—
without	scriptural	direction;	
asṛṣṭa-annam
—without
distribution	of	
prasādam;	mantra-hīnam
—with	no	chanting	of	the	Vedic
hymns;	
adakṣiṇam—
with	no	remunerations	to	the	priests;	
śraddhā—
faith;
virahitam
—without;	
yajñam
—sacrifice;	
tāmasam
—in	the	mode	of	ignorance;
paricakṣate—
is	to	be	considered.
TRANSLATION
And	that	sacrifice	performed	in	defiance	of	scriptural	injunctions,	in
which	no	spiritual	food	is	distributed,	no	hymns	are	chanted	and	no
remunerations	are	made	to	the	priests,	and	which	is	faithless—that
sacrifice	is	of	the	nature	of	ignorance.
PURPORT
Faith	in	the	mode	of	darkness	or	ignorance	is	actually	faithlessness.
Sometimes	people	worship	some	demigod	just	to	make	money	and	then	spend
the	money	for	recreation,	ignoring	the	scriptural	injunctions.	Such	ceremonial
shows	of	religiosity	are	not	accepted	as	genuine.	They	are	all	in	the	mode	of
darkness;	they	produce	a	demoniac	mentality	and	do	not	benefit	human
society.
TEXT	14
द े व द ् ि व ज ग ु ኄ प ् र ा ᇥ प ू ज न ं
	
श ौ च म ा ज ᆼ व म ्
	
।
ब ् र ቊ च य ᆼ म ि ह ं स ा
	
च
	
श ा र ी र ं
	
त प
	
उ ᇫ य त े
	
॥
१ ४
॥
deva-dvija-guru-prājña-
pūjanaṁ	śaucam	ārjavam
brahma-caryam	ahiṁsā	ca
śārīraṁ	tapa	ucyate
deva—
the	Supreme	Lord;	
dvija—
the	
brāhmaṇa;	guru—
the	spiritual	master;prājña—
worshipable	personalities;	
pūjanam
—worship;	
śaucam
—cleanliness;
ārjavam
—simplicity;	
brahma-caryam
—celibacy;	
ahiṁsā—
nonviolence;	
ca—
also;	
śārīram
—pertaining	to	the	body;	
tapaḥ
—austerity;	
ucyate
—is	said	to	be.
TRANSLATION
The	austerity	of	the	body	consists	in	this:	worship	of	the	Supreme
Lord,	the	brāhmaṇas,	the	spiritual	master,	and	superiors	like	the	father
and	mother.	Cleanliness,	simplicity,	celibacy	and	nonviolence	are	also
austerities	of	the	body.
PURPORT
The	Supreme	Godhead	here	explains	the	different	kinds	of	austerity	and
penance.	First	He	explains	the	austerities	and	penances	practiced	by	the	body.
One	should	offer,	or	learn	to	offer,	respect	to	God	or	to	the	demigods,	the
perfect,	qualified	
brāhmaṇas	
and	the	spiritual	master	and	superiors	like	father,
mother	or	any	person	who	is	conversant	with	Vedic	knowledge.	These	should
be	given	proper	respect.	One	should	practice	cleansing	oneself	externally	and
internally,	and	he	should	learn	to	become	simple	in	behavior.	He	should	not	do
anything	which	is	not	sanctioned	by	the	scriptural	injunction.	He	should	not
indulge	in	sex	outside	of	married	life,	for	sex	is	sanctioned	in	the	scripture
only	in	marriage,	not	otherwise.	This	is	called	celibacy.	These	are	penances
and	austerities	as	far	as	the	body	is	concerned.
TEXT	15
अ न ु ሲ े ग क र ं
	
व ा ᇧ य ं
	
स ᇰ य ं
	
ि प ् र य ि ह त ं
	
च
	
य त ्
	
।
ᇿ व ा ᇲ य ा य ा ᇷ य स न ं
	
च ै व
	
व ा ङ ् म य ं
	
त प
	
उ ᇫ य त े
	
॥
१ ५
॥
anudvega-karaṁ	vākyaṁ
satyaṁ	priya-hitaṁ	ca	yat
svādhyāyābhyasanaṁ	caiva
vāṅmayaṁ	tapa	ucyateanudvega—
not	agitating;	
karam—
producing;	
vākyam—
words;	
satyam
—
truthful;	
priya—
dear;	
hitam
—beneficial;	
ca—
also;	
yat
—which;	
svādhyāya
—
Vedic	study;	
abhyasanam—
practice;	
ca—
also;	
eva—
certainly;	
vāṅmayaṁ—
of	the	voice;	
tapaḥ—
austerity;	
ucyate—
is	said	to	be.
TRANSLATION
Austerity	of	speech	consists	in	speaking	truthfully	and	beneficially	and
in	avoiding	speech	that	offends.	One	should	also	recite	the	Vedas
regularly.
PURPORT
One	should	not	speak	in	such	a	way	as	to	agitate	the	minds	of	others.	Of
course,	when	a	teacher	speaks,	he	can	speak	the	truth	for	the	instruction	of	his
students,	but	such	a	teacher	should	not	speak	to	others	who	are	not	his
students	if	he	will	agitate	their	minds.	This	is	penance	as	far	as	talking	is
concerned.	Besides	that,	one	should	not	talk	nonsense.	When	speaking	in
spiritual	circles,	one's	statements	must	be	upheld	by	the	scriptures.	One	should
at	once	quote	from	scriptural	authority	to	back	up	what	he	is	saying.	At	the
same	time,	such	talk	should	be	very	pleasurable	to	the	ear.	By	such
discussions,	one	may	derive	the	highest	benefit	and	elevate	human	society.
There	is	a	limitless	stock	of	Vedic	literature,	and	one	should	study	this.	This	is
called	penance	of	speech.
TEXT	16
म न ः
	
प ् र स ा द ः
	
स ौ ᇸ य ᇰ व ं
	
म ौ न म ा ᇰ म ि व ि न ग ् र ह ः
	
।
भ ा व स ं श ु द ् ि ध ि र ᇰ य े त ሧ प ो
	
म ा न स म ु ᇫ य त े
	
॥
१ ६
॥
manaḥ-prasādaḥ	saumyatvaṁ
maunam	ātma-vinigrahaḥ
bhāva-saṁśuddhir	ity	etat
tapo	mānasam	ucyatemanaḥ-prasādaḥ—
satisfaction	of	the	mind;	
saumyatvam—
without	duplicity
towards	others;	
maunam—
gravity;	
ātma—
self;	
vinigrahaḥ—
control;	
bhāva
—
nature;	
saṁśuddhiḥ—
purification;	
iti—
thus;	
etat—
that	is;	
tapaḥ—	
austerity;
mānasam—
of	the	mind;	
ucyate—
is	said	to	be.
TRANSLATION
And	serenity,	simplicity,	gravity,	self-control	and	purity	of	thought	are
the	austerities	of	the	mind.
PURPORT
To	make	the	mind	austere	is	to	detach	it	from	sense	gratification.	It	should
be	so	trained	that	it	can	be	always	thinking	of	doing	good	for	others
.	
The	best
training	for	the	mind	is	gravity	in	thought.	One	should	not	deviate	from	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	and	must	always	avoid	sense	gratification.	To	purify	one's
nature	is	to	become	Kṛṣṇa	conscious.	Satisfaction	of	the	mind	can	be	obtained
only	by	taking	the	mind	away	from	thoughts	of	sense	enjoyment.	The	more
we	think	of	sense	enjoyment,	the	more	the	mind	becomes	dissatisfied.	In	the
present	age	we	unnecessarily	engage	the	mind	in	so	many	different	ways	for
sense	gratification,	and	so	there	is	no	possibility	of	the	mind's	becoming
satisfied.	The	best	course	is	to	divert	the	mind	to	the	Vedic	literature,	which	is
full	of	satisfying	stories,	as	in	the	
Purāṇas
	and	the	
Mahābhārata
.	One	can
take	advantage	of	this	knowledge	and	thus	become	purified.	The	mind	should
be	devoid	of	duplicity,	and	one	should	think	of	the	welfare	of	all.	Silence
means	that	one	is	always	thinking	of	self-realization.	The	person	in	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	observes	perfect	silence	in	this	sense.	Control	of	the	mind
means	detaching	the	mind	from	sense	enjoyment.	One	should	be
straightforward	in	his	dealing	and	thereby	purify	his	existence.	All	these
qualities	together	constitute	austerity	in	mental	activities.
TEXT	17
श ् र ሬ य ा
	
प र य ा
	
त ᇴ त ं
	
त प ᇿ त ि ቓ र ि व ध ं
	
न र ै ः
	
।
अ फ ल ा क ा ङ ् ि ᇤ ि भ य ु ᆼ ᇧ त ै ः
	
स ा ि ᇰ ᇰ व क ं
	
प ि र च ᇤ त े
	
॥
१ ७
॥śraddhayā	parayā	taptaṁ
tapas	tat	tri-vidhaṁ	naraiḥ
aphalākāṅkṣibhir	yuktaiḥ
sāttvikaṁ	paricakṣate
śraddhayā
—with	faith;	
parayā
—transcendental;	
taptam
—executed;	
tapaḥ
—austerity;	
tat
—that;	
tri-vidham
—three	kinds;	
naraiḥ
—by	men;	
aphala-
ākāṅkṣibhiḥ
—without	desires	for	fruits;	
yuktaiḥ
—engaged;	
sāttvikam
—in	the
mode	of	goodness;	
pari-cakṣate
—is	called.
TRANSLATION
This	threefold	austerity,	practiced	by	men	whose	aim	is	not	to	benefit
themselves	materially	but	to	please	the	Supreme,	is	of	the	nature	of
goodness.
TEXT	18
स ᇰ क ा र म ा न प ू ज ा थ ᆾ
	
त प ो
	
द ᇸ भ े न
	
च ै व
	
य त ्
	
।
ि क ् र य त े
	
त ि द ह
	
प ् र ो ᇧ त ं
	
र ा ज स ं
	
च ल म ध ् ኄ व म ्
	
॥
१ ८
॥
satkāra-māna-pūjārtham
tapo	dambhena	caiva	yat
kriyate	tad	iha	proktaṁ
rājasaṁ	calam	adhruvam
satkāra—
respect;	
māna—
honor;	
pūjā-artham
—for	worship;	
tapaḥ
—
austerity;
	dambhena—
with	pride;	
ca—
also;	
eva—
certainly;	
yat
—which	is;
kriyate
—	performed;	
tat
—that;	
iha—
in	this	world;	
proktam
—is	said;	
rājasam
—in	the	mode	of	passion;	
calam—
flickering;	
adhruvam—
temporary.
TRANSLATION
Those	ostentatious	penances	and	austerities	which	are	performed	in
order	to	gain	respect,	honor	and	reverence	are	said	to	be	in	the	mode	ofpassion.	They	are	neither	stable	nor	permanent.
PURPORT
Sometimes	penance	and	austerity	are	executed	to	attract	people	and	receive
honor,	respect	and	worship	from	others.	Persons	in	the	mode	of	passion
arrange	to	be	worshiped	by	subordinates	and	let	them	wash	their	feet	and	offer
riches.	Such	arrangements	artificially	made	by	the	performance	of	penances
are	considered	to	be	in	the	mode	of	passion.	The	results	are	temporary;	they
can	be	continued	for	some	time,	but	they	are	not	permanent.
TEXT	19
म ू ढ ग ् र ा ह े ण ा ᇰ म न ो
	
य ᇰ प ी ड य ा
	
ि क ् र य त े
	
त प ः
	
।
प र ᇿ य ो ᇰ स ा द न ा थ ᆾ
	
व ा
	
त ሧ ा म स म ु द ा ᇦ त म ्
	
॥
१ ९
॥
mūḍha-grāheṇātmanaḥ	yat
pīḍayā	kriyate	tapaḥ
parasyotsādanārthaṁ	vā
tat	tāmasam	udāhṛtam
mūḍha—
foolish;	
grāheṇa—
with	endeavor;	
ātmanaḥ—
of	one's	own	self;	
yat
—which;	
pīḍayā
—by	torture;	
kriyate
—is	performed;	
tapaḥ—
penance;
parasya—
to	others;	
utsādanārtham—
causing	annihilation;	
vā
—or;	
tat—
that;
tāmasam—
in	the	mode	of	darkness;	
udāhṛtam—
is	said	to	be.
TRANSLATION
And	those	penances	and	austerities	which	are	performed	foolishly	by
means	of	obstinant	self-torture,	or	to	destroy	or	injure	others,	are	said	to
be	in	the	mode	of	ignorance.
PURPORT
There	are	instances	of	foolish	penance	undertaken	by	demons	likeHiraṇyakasipu,	who	performed	austere	penances	to	become	immortal	and	kill
the	demigods.	He	prayed	to	Brahmā	for	such	things,	but	ultimately	he	was
killed	by	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	To	undergo	penances	for
something	which	is	impossible	is	certainly	in	the	mode	of	ignorance.
TEXT	20
द ा त ᇼ य ि म ि त
	
य ራ ा न ं
	
द ी य त े ऽ न ु प क ा ि र ण े
	
।
द े श े
	
क ा ल े
	
च
	
प ा त ् र े
	
च
	
त ራ ा न ं
	
स ा ि ᇰ ᇰ व क ं
	
ᇿ म ृ त म ्
	
॥
२ ०
॥
dātavyam	iti	yad	dānaṁ
dīyate	'nupakāriṇe
deśe	kāle	ca	pātre	ca
tad	dānaṁ	sāttvikaṁ	smṛtam
dātavyam—
worth	giving;	
iti—
thus;	
yat—
that	which;	
dānam—
charity;
dīyate—
given;	
anupakāriṇe—
to	any	person	irrespective	of	doing	good;	
dese
—
in	place;	
kāle—
in	time;	
ca—
also;	
pātre—
suitable	person;	
ca—
and;	
tat—
that;
dānam—
charity;	
sāttvikam—
in	the	mode	of	goodness;	
smṛtam—	
consider.
TRANSLATION
That	gift	which	is	given	out	of	duty,	at	the	proper	time	and	place,	to	a
worthy	person,	and	without	expectation	of	return,	is	considered	to	be
charity	in	the	mode	of	goodness.
PURPORT
In	the	Vedic	literature,	charity	given	to	a	person	engaged	in	spiritual
activities	is	recommended.	There	is	no	recommendation	for	giving	charity
indiscriminately.	Spiritual	perfection	is	always	a	consideration.	Therefore
charity	is	recommended	to	be	given	at	a	place	of	pilgrimage	and	at	lunar	or
solar	eclipses	or	at	the	end	of	the	month	or	to	a	qualified	
brāhmaṇa	
or	a
Vaiṣṇava	(devotee)	or	in	temples.	Such	charities	should	be	given	without	any
consideration	of	return.	Charity	to	the	poor	is	sometimes	given	out	ofcompassion,	but	if	a	poor	man	is	not	worth	giving	charity	to,	then	there	is	no
spiritual	advancement.	In	other	words,	indiscriminate	charity	is	not
recommended	in	the	Vedic	literature.
TEXT	21
य ሧ ु
	
प ् र ᇰ य ु प क ा र ा थ ᆾ
	
फ ल म ु द ् ि द ᇽ य
	
व ा
	
प ु न ः
	
।
द ी य त े
	
च
	
प ि र ि ᇧ ल ᇾ ट ं
	
त ራ ा न ं
	
र ा ज स ं
	
ᇿ म ृ त म ्
	
॥
२ १
॥
yat	tu	pratyupakārārthaṁ
phalam	uddiśya	vā	punaḥ
dīyate	ca	parikliṣṭaṁ
tad	dānaṁ	rājasaṁ	smṛtam
yat—
that	which;	
tu—
but;
	prati-upakāra-artham—
for	the	sake	of	getting
some	return;	
phalam—
result;	
uddiśya—
desiring;	
vā
—or;	
punaḥ—
again;	
dīyate
—
is	given	in	charity;	
ca—
also;	
parikliṣṭam—
grudgingly;	
tat—
that;	
dānam—
charity;	
rājasam—
in	the	mode	of	passion;	
smṛtam—
is	understood	to	be.
TRANSLATION
But	charity	performed	with	the	expectation	of	some	return,	or	with	a
desire	for	fruitive	results,	or	in	a	grudging	mood,	is	said	to	be	charity	in
the	mode	of	passion.
PURPORT
Charity	is	sometimes	performed	for	elevation	to	the	heavenly	kingdom	and
sometimes	with	great	trouble	and	with	repentance	afterwards.	"Why	have	I
spent	so	much	in	this	way?"	Charity	is	also	sometimes	made	under	some
obligation,	at	the	request	of	a	superior.	These	kinds	of	charity	are	said	to	be
made	in	the	mode	of	passion.
There	are	many	charitable	foundations	which	offer	their	gifts	to	institutions
where	sense	gratification	goes	on.	Such	charities	are	not	recommended	in	the
Vedic	scripture.	Only	charity	in	the	mode	of	goodness	is	recommended.TEXT	22
अ द े श क ा ल े
	
य ራ ा न म प ा त ् र े ᇷ य ᇽ च
	
द ी य त े
	
।
अ स ᇰ क ृ त म व ᇥ ा त ं
	
त ሧ ा म स म ु द ा ᇦ त म ्
	
॥
२ २
॥
adeśa-kāle	yad	dānam
apātrebhyaś	ca	dīyate
asatkṛtam	avajñātaṁ
tat	tāmasam	udāhṛtam
adesa—
unpurified	place;	
kāle—
unpurified	time;	
yat
—that	which	is;	
dānam
—charity;	
apātrebhyaḥ
—to	unworthy	persons;	
ca—
also;	
dīyate
—is	given;
asatkṛtam
—without	respect;	
avajñātam
—without	proper	attention;	
tat
—	that;
tāmasam
—in	the	mode	of	darkness;	
udāhṛtam—
is	said	to	be.
TRANSLATION
And	charity	performed	at	an	improper	place	and	time	and	given	to
unworthy	persons	without	respect	and	with	contempt	is	charity	in	the
mode	of	ignorance.
PURPORT
Contributions	for	indulgence	in	intoxication	and	gambling	are	not
encouraged	here.	That	sort	of	contribution	is	in	the	mode	of	ignorance.	Such
charity	is	not	beneficial;	rather,	sinful	persons	are	encouraged.	Similarly,	if	a
person	gives	charity	to	a	suitable	person	without	respect	and	without	attention,
that	sort	of	charity	is	also	said	to	be	in	the	mode	of	darkness.
TEXT	23
ओ ंत ᇰ स ि द ि त
	
ि न द ᆹ श ो
	
ब ् र ቊ ण ि ᇿ त ् र ि व ध ः
	
ᇿ म ृ त ः
	
।
ब ् र ा ቊ ण ा ᇿ त े न
	
व े द ा ᇽ च
	
य ᇥ ा ᇽ च
	
ि व ि ह त ा ः
	
प ु र ा
	
॥
२ ३
॥
om-tat-sad	iti	nirdeśobrahmaṇas	tri-vidhaḥ	smṛtaḥ
brāhmaṇās	tena	vedāś	ca
yajñāś	ca	vihitāḥ	purā
om—
indication	of	the	Supreme;	
tat—
that;	
sat—
eternal;	
iti—
that;	
nirdeśaḥ
—
indication;	
brāhmaṇāḥ—
of	the	Supreme;	
tri-vidhaḥ—
three	kinds;	
smṛtaḥ
—
consider;	
brahmaṇaḥ—
the	
brāhmaṇas;	tena—
therefore;	
vedāḥ—	
the	Vedic
literature;	
ca—
also;	
yajñāḥ—
sacrifice;	
ca—
also;	
vihitāḥ—
sacrifice;	
purā
—
formerly.
TRANSLATION
From	the	beginning	of	creation,	the	three	syllables—om	tat	sat—have
been	used	to	indicate	the	Supreme	Absolute	Truth	[Brahman].	They	were
uttered	by	brāhmaṇas	while	chanting	Vedic	hymns	and	during	sacrifices,
for	the	satisfaction	of	the	Supreme.
PURPORT
It	has	been	explained	that	penance,	sacrifice,	charity	and	foods	are	divided
into	three	categories:	the	modes	of	goodness,	passion	and	ignorance.	But
whether	first	class,	second	class	or	third	class,	they	are	all	conditioned,
contaminated	by	the	material	modes	of	nature.	When	they	are	aimed	at	the
Supreme–
om	tat	sat,	
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	the	eternal–they
become	means	for	spiritual	elevation.	In	the	scriptural	injunctions	such	an
objective	is	indicated.	These	three	words,	
om	tat	sat,	
particularly	indicate	the
Absolute	Truth,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	In	the	Vedic	hymns,	the
word	
om	
is	always	found.
One	who	acts	without	following	the	regulations	of	the	scriptures	will	not
attain	the	Absolute	Truth.	He	will	get	some	temporary	result,	but	not	the
ultimate	end	of	life.	The	conclusion	is	that	the	performance	of	charities,
sacrifice	and	penance	must	be	done	in	the	mode	of	goodness.	Performed	in	the
modes	of	passion	or	ignorance,	they	are	certainly	inferior	in	quality.	The	three
words	
om	tat	sat	
are	uttered	in	conjunction	with	the	holy	name	of	the	Supreme
Lord,	e.g.,	
om	tad	viṣṇoḥ.	
Whenever	a	Vedic	hymn	or	the	holy	name	of	the
Supreme	Lord	is	uttered,	
om	
is	added.	This	is	the	indication	of	Vedicliterature.	These	three	words	are	taken	from	Vedic	hymns.	
Om	ity	etad
brahmaṇo	nediṣṭaṁ	nāma	
indicates	the	first	goal.	Then	
tattvamasi	
indicates
the	second	goal.	And	
sad	eva	saumya	
indicates	the	third	goal.	Combined	they
become	
om	tat	sat.	
Formerly	when	Brahmā,	the	first	created	living	entity,
performed	sacrifices,	he	spoke	these	three	names	of	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead.	The	same	principle	holds	by	disciplic	succession.	So	this	hymn
has	great	significance.	
Bhagavad-gītā	
recommends,	therefore,	that	any	work
done	should	be	done	for	
om	tat	sat,	
or	for	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.	When	one	performs	penance,	charity,	and	sacrifice	with	these	three
words,	he	is	acting	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	a	scientific
execution	of	transcendental	activities	which	enables	one	to	return	home,	back
to	Godhead.	There	is	no	loss	of	energy	in	acting	in	such	a	transcendental	way.
TEXT	24
त ᇿ म ा द ो ि म ᇰ य ु द ा ᇦ ᇰ य
	
य ᇥ द ा न त प ः ि क ् र य ा ः
	
।
प ् र व त ᆼ ᇳ त े
	
ि व ध ा न ो ᇧ त ा ः
	
स त त ं
	
ब ् र ቊ व ा ि द न ा म ्
	
॥
२ ४
॥
tasmād	om	ity	udāhṛtya
yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ
pravartante	vidhānoktāḥ
satataṁ	brahma-vādinām
tasmāt—
therefore;	
om—
beginning	with	
om;	iti—
thus;	
udāhṛtya—
indicating;	
yajña—
sacrifice;	
dāna—
charity;	
tapaḥ—
penance;	
kriyāḥ—
performances;	
pravartante—
begins;	
vidhāna-uktāḥ—
according	to	scriptural
regulation;	
satatam—
always;	
brahma-vādinām—
of	the	transcendentalists.
TRANSLATION
Thus	the	transcendentalists	undertake	sacrifices,	charities,	and
penances,	beginning	always	with	om,	to	attain	the	Supreme.
PURPORTOm	tad	viṣṇoḥ	paramaṁ	padam.	
The	lotus	feet	of	Viṣṇu	are	the	supreme
devotional	platform.	The	performance	of	everything	on	behalf	of	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead	assures	the	perfection	of	all	activity.
TEXT	25
त ि द ᇰ य न ि भ स ᇳ ध ा य
	
फ ल ं
	
य ᇥ त प ः ि क ् र य ा ः
	
।
द ा न ि क ् र य ा ᇽ च
	
ि व ि व ध ा ः
	
ि क ् र य ᇳ त े
	
म ो ᇤ क ा ङ ् ि ᇤ ि भ ः
	
॥
२ ५
॥
tad	ity	anabhisandhāya
phalaṁ	yajña-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ
dāna-kriyāś	ca	vividhāḥ
kriyante	mokṣa-kāṅkṣibhiḥ
tat—
that;	
iti—
they;	
anabhisandhāya—
without	fruitive	result;	
phalam
—
result	of	sacrifice;	
yajña—
sacrifice;	
tapaḥ—
penance;	
kriyāḥ—
activities;
dāna—
charity;	
kriyāḥ—
activities;	
ca—
also;	
vividhāḥ—
varieties;	
kriyante
—
done;	
mokṣa-kāṅkṣibhiḥ—
those	who	actually	desire	liberation.
TRANSLATION
One	should	perform	sacrifice,	penance	and	charity	with	the	word	tat.
The	purpose	of	such	transcendental	activities	is	to	get	free	from	the
material	entanglement.
PURPORT
To	be	elevated	to	the	spiritual	position,	one	should	not	act	for	any	material
gain.	Acts	should	be	performed	for	the	ultimate	gain	of	being	transferred	to
the	spiritual	kingdom,	back	to	home,	back	to	Godhead.
TEXTS	26-27
स द ् भ ा व े
	
स ा ध ु भ ा व े
	
च
	
स ि द ᇰ य े त ᇰ प ् र य ु ᇬ य त े
	
।
प ् र श ᇿ त े
	
क म ᆼ ि ण
	
त थ ा
	
स ᇫ छ ᇶ द ः
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
य ु ᇬ य त े
	
॥
२ ६
॥य ᇥ े
	
त प ि स
	
द ा न े
	
च
	
ि ᇿ थ ि त ः
	
स ि द ि त
	
च ो ᇫ य त े
	
।
क म ᆼ
	
च ै व
	
त द थ ी ᆼ य ं
	
स ि द ᇰ य े व ा ि भ ध ी य त े
	
॥
२ ७
॥
sad-bhāve	sādhu-bhāve	ca
sad	ity	etat	prayujyate
praśaste	karmaṇi	tathā
sac-chabdaḥ	pārtha	yujyate
yajñe	tapasi	dāne	ca
sthitiḥ	sad	iti	cocyate
karma	caiva	tad-arthīyaṁ
sad	ity	evābhidhīyate
sat-bhāve—
in	the	sense	of	the	nature	of	the	Supreme;	
sādhu-bhāve—
in	the
sense	of	the	nature	of	devotion;	
ca—
also;	
sat—
the	Supreme;	
iti—
thus;	
etat—
this;	
prayujyate—
is	used;	
praśaste—
bona	fide;	
karmaṇi—
activities;	
tathā—
also;	
sat-śabdaḥ—
sound;	
pārtha
—O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
yujyate—
is	used;	
yajñe—
sacrifice;	
tapasi—
in	penance;	
dāne—
charity;	
ca—
also;	
sthitiḥ—
situated;	
sat—
the	Supreme;	
iti—
thus;	
ca—
and;	
ucyate—
pronounced;	
karma—
work;	
ca
—
also;	
eva—
certainly;	
tat—
that;	
arthīyam—
are	meant;	
sat—
Supreme;	
iti
—
thus;	
eva—
certainly;	
abhidhīyate—
is	practiced.
TRANSLATION
The	Absolute	Truth	is	the	objective	of	devotional	sacrifice,	and	it	is
indicated	by	the	word	sat.	These	works	of	sacrifice,	of	penance	and	of
charity,	true	to	the	absolute	nature,	are	performed	to	please	the	Supreme
Person,	O	son	of	Pṛthā.
PURPORT
The	words
	praśaste	karmaṇi,	
or	prescribed	duties,	indicate	that	there	are
many	activities	prescribed	in	the	Vedic	literature	which	are	purificatory
processes	beginning	from	parental	care	up	to	the	end	of	one's	life.	Such
purificatory	processes	are	adopted	for	the	ultimate	liberation	of	the	living
entity.	In	all	such	activities	it	is	recommended	that	one	should	vibrate	
om	tat
sat.	
The	words	
sad-bhāve	
and	
sādhu-bhāve	
indicate	the	transcendentalsituation.	One	who	is	acting	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	called	
sattva,	
and	one
who	is	fully	conscious	of	activities	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	called	
svarūpa.
In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
it	is	said	that	the	transcendental	subject	matter
becomes	clear	in	the	association	of	the	devotees.	Without	good	association,
one	cannot	achieve	transcendental	knowledge.	When	initiating	a	person	or
offering	the	sacred	thread,	one	vibrates	the	words	
om	tat	sat.	
Similarly,	in	all
kinds	of	yogic	performances,	the	supreme	object,	
om	tat	sat
	is	invoked.	These
words	
om	tat	sat	
are	used	to	perfect	all	activities.	This	supreme	
om	tat	sat
makes	everything	complete.
TEXT	28
अ श ् र ሬ य ा
	
ह ु त ं
	
द ሧ ं
	
त प ᇿ त ᇴ त ं
	
क ृ त ं
	
च
	
य त ्
	
।
अ स ि द ᇰ य ु ᇫ य त े
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
न
	
च
	
त ᇰ प ् र े ᇰ य
	
न ो
	
इ ह
	
॥
२ ८
॥
aśraddhayā	hutaṁ	dattaṁ
tapas	taptaṁ	kṛtaṁ	ca	yat
asad	ity	ucyate	pārtha
na	ca	tat	pretya	no	iha
aśraddhayā—
without	faith;	
hutam
—performed;	
dattam
—given;	
tapaḥ
—
penance;	
taptam
—executed;	
kṛtam
—performed;	
ca
—also;	
yat
—that	which;
asat
—falls;	
iti—
thus;	
ucyate
—is	said	to	be;	
pārtha—
O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
na
—
never;	
ca
—also;	
tat
—that;	
pretya
—after	death;	
no
—nor;	
iha—
in	this	life.
TRANSLATION
But	sacrifices,	austerities	and	charities	performed	without	faith	in	the
Supreme	are	nonpermanent,	O	son	of	Pṛthā,	regardless	of	whatever	rites
are	performed.	They	are	called	asat	and	are	useless	both	in	this	life	and
the	next.
PURPORT
Anything	done	without	the	transcendental	objective—whether	it	besacrifice,	charity	or	penance-is	useless.	Therefore,	in	this	verse,	it	is	declared
that	such	activities	are	abominable.	Everything	should	be	done	for	the
Supreme	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Without	such	faith,	and	without	the	proper
guidance,	there	can	never	be	any	fruit.	In	all	the	Vedic	scriptures,	faith	in	the
Supreme	is	advised.	In	the	pursuit	of	all	Vedic	instructions,	the	ultimate	goal	is
the	understanding	of	Kṛṣṇa.	No	one	can	obtain	success	without	following	this
principle.	Therefore,	the	best	course	is	to	work	from	the	very	beginning	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	under	the	guidance	of	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master.	That
is	the	way	to	make	everything	successful.
In	the	conditional	state,	people	are	attracted	to	worship	demigods,	ghosts,	or
Yakṣas	like	Kuvera.	The	mode	of	goodness	is	better	than	the	modes	of	passion
and	ignorance,	but	one	who	takes	directly	to	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is
transcendental	to	all	three	modes	of	material	nature.	Although	there	is	a
process	of	gradual	elevation,	if	one,	by	the	association	of	pure	devotees,	takes
directly	to	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	that	is	the	best	way.	And	that	is
recommended	in	this	chapter.	To	achieve	success	in	this	way,	one	must	first
find	the	proper	spiritual	master	and	receive	training	under	his	direction.	Then
one	can	achieve	faith	in	the	Supreme.	When	that	faith	matures,	in	course	of
time,	it	is	called	love	of	God.	This	love	is	the	ultimate	goal	of	the	living
entities.	One	should,	therefore,	take	to	Krṣṇa	consciousness	directly.	That	is
the	message	of	this	Seventeenth	Chapter.
Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	Seventeenth	Chapter	of	the
Śrīmad-Bhagavad-gītā
	in	the	matter	of	the	Divisions	of	Faith.Chapter-18
CHAPTER	EIGHTEEN
Conclusion—
The	Perfection	of	Renunciation
TEXT	1
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।
स ं ᇳ य ा स ᇿ य
	
म ह ा ब ा ह ो
	
त ᇰ ᇰ व ि म ᇫ छ ा ि म
	
व े ि द त ु म ्
	
।
ᇰ य ा ग ᇿ य
	
च
	
ᇦ ष ी क े श
	
प ृ थ ᇧ क े ि श ि न ष ू द न
	
॥
१
॥
arjuna	uvāca
sannyāsasya	mahābāhotattvam	icchāmi	veditum
tyāgasya	ca	hṛṣīkeśa
pṛthak	keśīniṣūdana
arjunaḥ	uvāca—
Arjuna	said;	
sannyāsasya
—renunciation;	
mahā-bāho
—O
mighty-armed	one;	
tattvam—
truth;	
icchāmi—
I	wish;	
veditum—
to	understand;
tyāgasya
—of	renunciation;	
ca—
also;	
hṛṣīkeśa
—O	master	of	the	senses;
pṛthak—
differently;	
keśi-nisūdana
—O	killer	of	the	Keśī	demon.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	said,	O	mighty-armed	one,	I	wish	to	understand	the	purpose	of
renunciation	[tyāga]	and	of	the	renounced	order	of	life	[sannyāsa],	O
killer	of	the	Keśī	demon,	Hṛṣīkeśa.
PURPORT
Actually	the	
Bhagavad-gītā
	is	finished	in	seventeen	chapters.	The
Eighteenth	Chapter	is	a	supplementary	summarization	of	the	topics	discussed
before.	In	every	chapter	of	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
Lord	Kṛṣṇa	stresses	that	devotional
service	unto	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is	the	ultimate	goal	of	life.
This	same	point	is	summarized	in	the	Eighteenth	Chapter	as	the	most
confidential	path	of	knowledge.	In	the	first	six	chapters,	stress	was	given	to
devotional	service:	
yoginām	api	sarveṣām	...
	"Of	all	
yogīs	
or
transcendentalists,	one	who	always	thinks	of	Me	within	himself	is	best."	In	the
next	six	chapters,	pure	devotional	service	and	its	nature	and	activity	were
discussed.	In	the	third	six	chapters,	knowledge,	renunciation,	the	activities	of
material	nature	and	transcendental	nature,	and	devotional	service	were
described.	It	was	concluded	that	all	acts	should	be	performed	in	conjunction
with	the	Supreme	Lord,	summarized	by	the	words	
om
	
tat	sat,	
which	indicate
Viṣṇu,	the	Supreme	Person.	In	the	third	part	of	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
devotional
service	was	established	by	the	example	of	past	
ācāryas	
and	the	
Brahma-
sūtra,	
the	
Vedānta-sūtra,	
which	cites	that	devotional	service	is	the	ultimate
purpose	of	life	and	nothing	else.	Certain	impersonalists	consider	themselves
monopolizers	of	the	knowledge	of	
Vedānta-sūtra,	
but	actually	the	
Vedānta-
sūtra
	is	meant	for	understanding	devotional	service,	for	the	Lord	Himself	is
the	composer	of	the	
Vedānta-sūtra,	
and	He	is	its	knower.	That	is	described	inthe	Fifteenth	Chapter.	In	every	scripture,	every	
Veda,	
devotional	service	is	the
objective.	That	is	explained	in	
Bhagavad-gītā.
As	in	the	Second	Chapter	a	synopsis	of	the	whole	subject	matter	was
described,	similarly,	in	the	Eighteenth	Chapter	also	the	summary	of	all
instruction	is	given.	The	purpose	of	life	is	indicated	to	be	renunciation	and
attainment	of	the	transcendental	position	above	the	three	material	modes	of
nature.	Arjuna	wants	to	clarify	the	two	distinct	subject	matters	of	
Bhagavad-
gītā,	
namely	renunciation	
(tyāga)	
and	the	renounced	order	of	life	(
sannyāsa
).
Thus	he	is	asking	the	meaning	of	these	two	words.
Two	words	used	in	this	verse	to	address	the	Supreme	Lord—Hṛṣīkeśa	and
Keśinisūdana—are	significant.	Hṛṣīkeśa	is	Kṛṣṇa,	the	master	of	all	senses,
who	can	always	help	us	attain	mental	serenity.	Arjuna	requests	Him	to
summarize	everything	in	such	a	way	that	he	can	remain	equiposed.	Yet	he	has
some	doubts,	and	doubts	are	always	compared	to	demons.	He	therefore
addresses	Kṛṣṇa	as	Keśinisūdana.	Keśī	was	a	most	formidable	demon	who
was	killed	by	the	Lord;	now	Arjuna	is	expecting	Kṛṣṇa	to	kill	the	demon	of
doubt.
TEXT	2
श ् र ी भ ग व ा न ु व ा च
	
।
क ा ᇸ य ा न ा ं
	
क म ᆼ ण ा ं
	
ᇳ य ा स ं
	
स ं ᇳ य ा स ं
	
क व य ो
	
ि व द ु ः
	
।
स व ᆼ क म ᆼ फ ल ᇰ य ा ग ं
	
प ् र ा ह ु ᇿ ᇰ य ा ग ं
	
ि व च ᇤ ण ा ः
	
॥
२
॥
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca
kāmyānāṁ	karmaṇāṁ	nyāsaṁ
sannyāsaṁ	kavayo	viduḥ
sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ
prāhus	tyāgaṁ	vicakṣaṇāḥ
śrī	bhagavān	uvāca—
the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	said;	
kāmyānām
—
with	desire;	
karmaṇām—
activities;	
nyāsam—
renunciation;	
sannyāsam
—
renounced	order	of	life;	
kavayaḥ—
the	learned;	
viduḥ—
know;	
sarva—
all;
karma—
activities;	
phala—
of	results;	
tyāgam—
renunciation;	
prāhuḥ—
call;
tyāgam—
renunciation;	
vicakṣaṇāḥ—
the	experienced.
TRANSLATIONThe	Supreme	Lord	said,	To	give	up	the	results	of	all	activities	is	called
renunciation	[tyāga]	by	the	wise.	And	that	state	is	called	the	renounced
order	of	life	[sannyāsa]	by	great	learned	men.
PURPORT
The	performance	of	activities	for	results	has	to	be	given	up.	This	is	the
instruction	of	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
But	activities	leading	to	advanced	spiritual
knowledge	are	not	to	be	given	up.	This	will	be	made	clear	in	the	next	verse.
There	are	many	prescriptions	of	methods	for	performing	sacrifice	for	some
particular	purpose	in	the	Vedic	literatures.	There	are	certain	sacrifices	to
perform	to	attain	a	good	son	or	to	attain	elevation	to	the	higher	planets,	but
sacrifices	prompted	by	desires	should	be	stopped.	However,	sacrifice	for	the
purification	of	one's	heart	or	for	advancement	in	the	spiritual	science	should
not	be	given	up.
TEXT	3
ᇰ य ा ᇬ य ं
	
द ो ष व ि द ᇰ य े क े
	
क म ᆼ
	
प ् र ा ह ु म ᆼ न ी ि ष ण ः
	
।
य ᇥ द ा न त प ः क म ᆼ
	
न
	
ᇰ य ा ᇬ य ि म ि त
	
च ा प र े
	
॥
३
॥
tyājyaṁ	doṣavad	ity	eke
karma	prāhur	manīṣiṇaḥ
yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma
na	tyājyam	iti	cāpare
tyājyam—
must	be	given	up;	
doṣavat—
as	an	evil;	
iti—
thus;	
eke—
one	group;
karma—
work;	
prāhuḥ
—said;	
manīṣiṇaḥ—
of	great	thinkers;	
yajña—	
sacrifice;
dāna—
charity;	
tapaḥ—
penance;	
karma—
work;	
na—
never;	
tyājyam	—
is	to	be
given	up;	
iti—
thus;	
ca—
certainly;	
apare—
others.
TRANSLATION
Some	learned	men	declare	that	all	kinds	of	fruitive	activities	should	be
given	up,	but	there	are	yet	other	sages	who	maintain	that	acts	of	sacrifice,charity	and	penance	should	never	be	abandoned.
PURPORT
There	are	many	activities	in	the	Vedic	literatures	which	are	subjects	of
contention.	For	instance,	it	is	said	that	an	animal	can	be	killed	in	a	sacrifice,
yet	some	maintain	animal	killing	is	completely	abominable.	Although	animal
killing	in	a	sacrifice	is	recommended	in	the	Vedic	literature,	the	animal	is	not
considered	to	be	killed.	The	sacrifice	is	to	give	a	new	life	to	the	animal.
Sometimes	the	animal	is	given	a	new	animal	life	after	being	killed	in	the
sacrifice,	and	sometimes	the	animal	is	promoted	immediately	to	the	human
form	of	life.	But	there	are	different	opinions	among	the	sages.	Some	say	that
animal	killing	should	always	be	avoided,	and	others	say	that	for	a	specific
sacrifice	it	is	good.	All	these	different	opinions	on	sacrificial	activity	are	now
being	clarified	by	the	Lord	Himself.
TEXT	4
ि न ᇽ च य ं
	
श ृ ण ु
	
म े
	
त त ् र
	
ᇰ य ा ग े
	
भ र त स ሧ म
	
।
ᇰ य ा ग ो
	
ि ह
	
प ु ኄ ष ᇼ य ा घ ् र
	
ि त ् र ि व ध ः
	
स ᇸ प ् र क ी ि त ᆼ त ः
	
॥
४
॥
niścayaṁ	śṛṇu	me	tatra
tyāge	bharata-sattama
tyāgo	hi	puruṣa-vyāghra
tri-vidhaḥ	samprakīrtitaḥ
niścayam
—certainly;	
śṛṇu
—hear;	
me—
from	Me;	
tatra—
there;	
tyāge—
in
the	matter	of	renunciation;	
bharata-sattama
—O	best	of	the	Bhāratas;	
tyāgaḥ
—
renunciation;	
hi—
certainly;	
puruṣa-vyāghra
—O	tiger	among	human	beings;
tri-vidhaḥ—
three	kinds;	
samprakīrtitaḥ—
is	declared.
TRANSLATION
O	best	of	the	Bhāratas,	hear	from	Me	now	about	renunciation.	O	tiger
among	men,	there	are	three	kinds	of	renunciation	declared	in	the
scriptures.PURPORT
Although	there	are	differences	of	opinion	about	renunciation,	here	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa,	gives	His	judgment,	which
should	be	taken	as	final.	After	all,	the	
Vedas	
are	different	laws	given	by	the
Lord.	Here	the	Lord	is	personally	present,	and	His	word	should	be	taken	as
final.	The	Lord	says	that	the	process	of	renunciation	should	be	considered	in
terms	of	the	modes	of	material	nature	in	which	they	are	performed.
TEXT	5
य ᇥ द ा न त प ः क म ᆼ
	
न
	
ᇰ य ा ᇬ य ं
	
क ा य ᆼ म े व
	
त त ्
	
।
य ᇥ ो
	
द ा न ं
	
त प ᇽ च ै व
	
प ा व न ा ि न
	
म न ी ि ष ण ा म ्
	
॥
५
॥
yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma
na	tyājyaṁ	kāryam	eva	tat
yajño	dānaṁ	tapaś	caiva
pāvanāni	manīṣiṇām
yajña
—sacrifice;	
dāna
—charity;	
tapaḥ
—penance;	
karma
—activities;	
na
—
never;	
tyājyam
—to	be	given	up;	
kāryam
—must	be	done;	
eva
—certainly;	
tat
—
that;	
yajñaḥ
—sacrifice;	
dānam
—charity;	
tapaḥ—
penance;	
ca
—also;	
eva
—
certainly;	
pāvanāni
—purifying;	
manīṣiṇām
—even	of	the	great	souls.
TRANSLATION
Acts	of	sacrifice,	charity	and	penance	are	not	to	be	given	up	but	should
be	performed.	Indeed,	sacrifice,	charity	and	penance	purify	even	the
great	souls.
PURPORT
The	
yogīs
	should	perform	acts	for	the	advancement	of	human	society.	There
are	many	purificatory	processes	for	advancing	a	human	being	to	spiritual	life.
The	marriage	ceremony,	for	example,	is	considered	to	be	one	of	thesesacrifices.	It	is	called	
vivāha-yajña.	
Should	a	
sannyāsī,	
who	is	in	the
renounced	order	of	life	and	who	has	given	up	his	family	relations,	encourage
the	marriage	ceremony?	The	Lord	says	here	that	any	sacrifice	which	is	meant
for	human	welfare	should	never	be	given	up.	
Vivāha-yajña,	
the	marriage
ceremony,	is	meant	to	regulate	the	human	mind	to	become	peaceful	for
spiritual	advancement.	For	most	men,	this	
vivāha-yajña	
should	be	encouraged
even	by	persons	in	the	renounced	order	of	life.	
Sannyasīs	
should	never
associate	with	women,	but	that	does	not	mean	that	one	who	is	in	the	lower
stages	of	life,	a	young	man,	should	not	accept	a	wife	in	the	marriage
ceremony.	All	prescribed	sacrifices	are	meant	for	achieving	the	Supreme	Lord.
Therefore,	in	the	lower	stages,	they	should	not	be	given	up.	Similarly,	charity
is	for	the	purification	of	the	heart.	If	charity	is	given	to	suitable	persons,	as
described	previously,	it	leads	one	to	advanced	spiritual	life.
TEXT	6
ए त ा ᇳ य ि प
	
त ु
	
क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
स ङ ् ग ं
	
ᇰ य ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
फ ल ा ि न
	
च
	
।
क त ᆼ ᇼ य ा न ी ि त
	
म े
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
ि न ि ᇽ च त ं
	
म त म ु ሧ म म ्
	
॥
६
॥
etāny	api	tu	karmāṇi
saṅgaṁ	tyaktvā	phalāni	ca
kartavyānīti	me	pārtha
niścitaṁ	matam	uttamam
etāni—
all	this;	
api—
certainly;	
tu—
must;	
karmāṇi—
activities;	
saṅgam
—
association;	
tyaktvā—
renouncing;	
phalāni—
results;	
ca—
also;	
kartavyāni
—
as	duty;	
iti—
thus;	
me—
My;
	pārtha
—O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
niścitam—
definite;
matam—
opinion;	
uttamam—
the	best.
TRANSLATION
All	these	activities	should	be	performed	without	any	expectation	of
result.	They	should	be	performed	as	a	matter	of	duty,	O	son	of	Pṛthā.
That	is	My	final	opinion.
PURPORTAlthough	all	sacrifices	are	purifying,	one	should	not	expect	any	result	by
such	performances.	In	other	words,	all	sacrifices	which	are	meant	for	material
advancement	in	life	should	be	given	up,	but	sacrifices	that	purify	one's
existence	and	elevate	one	to	the	spiritual	plane	should	not	be	stopped.
Everything	that	leads	to	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	must	be	encouraged.	In	the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam	
also	it	is	said	that	any	activity	which	leads	to	devotional
service	to	the	Lord	should	be	accepted.	That	is	the	highest	criterion	of
religion.	A	devotee	of	the	Lord	should	accept	any	kind	of	work,	sacrifice,	or
charity	which	will	help	him	in	the	discharge	of	devotional	service	to	the	Lord.
TEXT	7
ि न य त ᇿ य
	
त ु
	
स ं ᇳ य ा स ः
	
क म ᆼ ण ो
	
न ो प प ሱ त े
	
।
म ो ह ा ሧ ᇿ य
	
प ि र ᇰ य ा ग ᇿ त ा म स ः
	
प ि र क ी ि त ᆼ त ः
	
॥
७
॥
niyatasya	tu	sannyāsaḥ
karmaṇo	nopapadyate
mohāt	tasya	parityāgas
tāmasaḥ	parikīrtitaḥ
niyatasya
—prescribed	duties;	
tu
—but;	
sannyāsaḥ
—renunciation;
karmaṇaḥ	
—activities;	
na
—never;	
upapadyate—
is	deserved;	
mohāt
—by
illusion;	
tasya
—	of	which;	
parityāgaḥ—
renunciation;	
tāmasaḥ
—in	the	mode
of	ignorance;	
parikīrtitaḥ—
declared.
TRANSLATION
Prescribed	duties	should	never	be	renounced.	If,	by	illusion,	one	gives
up	his	prescribed	duties,	such	renunciation	is	said	to	be	in	the	mode	of
ignorance.
PURPORT
Work	for	material	satisfaction	must	be	given	up,	but	activities	which
promote	one	to	spiritual	activity,	like	cooking	for	the	Supreme	Lord	and
offering	the	food	to	the	Lord	and	then	accepting	the	food,	are	recommended.	Itis	said	that	a	person	in	the	renounced	order	of	life	should	not	cook	for	himself.
Cooking	for	oneself	is	prohibited,	but	cooking	for	the	Supreme	Lord	is	not
prohibited.	Similarly,	a	
sannyāsī
	may	perform	a	marriage	ceremony	to	help	his
disciple	in	the	advancement	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	If	one	renounces	such
activities,	it	is	to	be	understood	that	he	is	acting	in	the	mode	of	darkness.
TEXT	8
द ु ः ख ि म ᇰ य े व
	
य ᇰ क म ᆼ
	
क ा य ᇧ ल े श भ य ा ᇰ ᇰ य ज े त ्
	
।
स
	
क ृ ᇰ व ा
	
र ा ज स ं
	
ᇰ य ा ग ं
	
न ै व
	
ᇰ य ा ग फ ल ं
	
ल भ े त ्
	
॥
८
॥
duḥkham	ity	eva	yat	karma
kāya-kleśa-bhayāt	tyajet
sa	kṛtvā	rājasaṁ	tyāgaṁ
naiva	tyāga-phalaṁ	labhet
duḥkham—
unhappy;	
iti
—thus;	
eva—
certainly;	
yat
—that	which;	
karma
—
work;	
kāya
—body;	
kleśa—
troublesome;	
bhayāt
—out	of;	
tyajet
—fear;	
saḥ—
that;	
kṛtvā
—after	doing;	
rājasam
—in	the	mode	of	passion;	
tyāgam
—
renunciation;	
na
	
eva
—certainly	not;	
tyāga
—renounced;	
phalam
—results;
labhet—
gain.
TRANSLATION
Anyone	who	gives	up	prescribed	duties	as	troublesome,	or	out	of	fear,	is
said	to	be	in	the	mode	of	passion.	Such	action	never	leads	to	the	elevation
of	renunciation.
PURPORT
One	who	is	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	should	not	give	up	earning	money	out
of	fear	that	he	is	performing	fruitive	activities.	If	by	working	one	can	engage
his	money	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	or	if	by	rising	early	in	the	morning	one	can
advance	his	transcendental	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	one	should	not	desist	out	of
fear	or	because	such	activities	are	considered	troublesome.	Such	renunciation
is	in	the	mode	of	passion.	The	result	of	passionate	work	is	always	miserable.Even	if	a	person	renounces	work	in	that	spirit,	he	never	gets	the	result	of
renunciation.
TEXT	9
क ा य ᆼ ि म ᇰ य े व
	
य ᇰ क म ᆼ
	
ि न य त ं
	
ि क ् र य त े ऽ ज ु ᆼ न
	
।
स ङ ् ग ं
	
ᇰ य ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
फ ल ं
	
च ै व
	
स
	
ᇰ य ा ग ः
	
स ा ि ᇰ ᇰ व क ो
	
म त ः
	
॥
९
॥
kāryam	ity	eva	yat	karma
niyataṁ	kriyate	'rjuna
saṅgaṁ	tyaktvā	phalaṁ	caiva
sa	tyāgaḥ	sāttviko	mataḥ
kāryam—
must	be	done;	
iti—
thus;	
eva—
thus;	
yat—
that	which;	
karma—
work;	
niyatam—
prescribed;	
kriyate—
performed;	
arjuna
—O	Arjuna;	
saṅgam
—
association;	
tyaktvā—
giving	up;	
phalam—
result;	
ca—
also;	
eva—	
certainly;
saḥ—
that;	
tyāgaḥ—
renunciation;	
sāttvikaḥ—
in	the	mode	of	goodness;	
mataḥ
—
in	My	opinion.
TRANSLATION
But	he	who	performs	his	prescribed	duty	only	because	it	ought	to	be
done,	and	renounces	all	attachment	to	the	fruit—his	renunciation	is	of	the
nature	of	goodness,	O	Arjuna.
PURPORT
Prescribed	duties	must	be	performed	with	this	mentality.	One	should	act
without	attachment	for	the	result;	he	should	be	disassociated	from	the	modes
of	work.	A	man	working	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	in	a	factory	does	not
associate	himself	with	the	work	of	the	factory,	nor	with	the	workers	of	the
factory.	He	simply	works	for	Kṛṣṇa.	And	when	he	gives	up	the	result	for
Kṛṣṇa,	he	is	acting	transcendentally.
TEXT	10न
	
ሲ े ᇾ ट ᆸ क ु श ल ं
	
क म ᆼ
	
क ु श ल े
	
न ा न ु ष ᇬ ज त े
	
।
ᇰ य ा ग ी
	
स ᇰ ᇰ व स म ा ि व ᇾ ट ो
	
म े ध ा व ी
	
ि छ ᇳ न स ं श य ः
	
॥
१ ०
॥
na	dveṣṭy	akuśalaṁ	karma
kuśale	nānuṣajjate
tyāgī	sattva-samāviṣṭo
medhāvī	chinna-saṁśayaḥ
na—
never;	
dveṣṭi—
hates;	
akuśalam—
inauspicious;	
karma—
work;	
kuśale
—
in	auspicious;	
na—
nor;	
anuṣajjate—
becomes	attached;	
tyāgī—
the
renouncer;	
sattva—
goodness;	
samāviṣṭaḥ—
absorbed	in;	
medhāvī—
intelligent;
chinna—	
cut	up;	
saṁśayaḥ—
all	doubts.
TRANSLATION
Those	who	are	situated	in	the	mode	of	goodness,	who	neither	hate
inauspicious	work	nor	are	attached	to	auspicious	work,	have	no	doubts
about	work.
PURPORT
It	is	said	in	
Bhagavad-gītā	
that	one	can	never	give	up	work	at	any	time.
Therefore	he	who	works	for	Kṛṣṇa	and	does	not	enjoy	the	fruitive	results,	who
offers	everything	to	Kṛṣṇa,	is	actually	a	renouncer.	There	are	many	members
of	the	International	Society	for	Krishna	Consciousness	who	work	very	hard	in
their	office	or	in	the	factory	or	some	other	place,	and	whatever	they	earn	they
give	to	the	Society.	Such	highly	elevated	souls	are	actually	
sannyāsīs
	and	are
situated	in	the	renounced	order	of	life.	It	is	clearly	outlined	here	how	to
renounce	the	fruits	of	work	and	for	what	purpose	fruits	should	be	renounced.
TEXT	11
न
	
ि ह
	
द े ह भ ृ त ा
	
श ᇧ य ं
	
ᇰ य ᇧ त ु ं
	
क म ा ᆼ ᇯ य श े ष त ः
	
।
य ᇿ त ु
	
क म ᆼ फ ल ᇰ य ा ग ी
	
स
	
ᇰ य ा ग ी ᇰ य ि भ ध ी य त े
	
॥
१ १
॥
na	hi	deha-bhṛtā	śakyaṁtyaktuṁ	karmāṇy	aśeṣataḥ
yas	tu	karma-phala-tyāgī
sa	tyāgīty	abhidhīyate
na
—never;	
hi—
certainly;	
deha-bhṛtā—
of	the	embodied;	
śakyam—	
possible;
tyaktum—
to	renounce;	
karmāṇi—
activities	of;	
aśeṣataḥ—	
altogether;	
yaḥ	tu
—
anyone	who;	
karma—
work;	
phala—
result;	
tyāgī—	
renouncer;	
saḥ—
he;
tyāgī—
the	renouncer;	
iti—
thus;	
abhidhīyate—
it	is	said.
TRANSLATION
It	is	indeed	impossible	for	an	embodied	being	to	give	up	all	activities.
Therefore	it	is	said	that	he	who	renounces	the	fruits	of	action	is	one	who
has	truly	renounced.
PURPORT
A	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	acting	in	knowledge	of	his	relationship
with	Kṛṣṇa	is	always	liberated.	Therefore	he	does	not	have	to	enjoy	or	suffer
the	results	of	his	acts	after	death.
TEXT	12
अ ि न ᇾ ट ि म ᇾ ट ं
	
ि म श ् र ं
	
च
	
ि त ् र ि व ध ं
	
क म ᆼ ण ः
	
फ ल म ्
	
।
भ व ᇰ य ᇰ य ा ि ग न ा ं
	
प ् र े ᇰ य
	
न
	
त ु
	
स ं ᇳ य ा ि स न ा ं
	
ᇧ व ि च त ्
	
॥
१ २
॥
aniṣṭam	iṣṭaṁ	miśraṁ	ca
tri-vidhaṁ	karmaṇaḥ	phalam
bhavaty	atyāgināṁ	pretya
na	tu	sannyāsināṁ	kvacit
aniṣṭam
—leading	to	hell;	
iṣṭam
—leading	to	heaven;	
miśram	ca
—or
mixture;	
tri-vidham—
three	kinds;	
karmaṇaḥ—
work;	
phalam—
result;	
bhavati
—
becomes;	
atyāginām
—of	the	renouncer;	
pretya
—after	death;	
na	tu
—	but
not;	
sannyāsinām
—of	the	renounced	order;	
kvacit
—at	any	time.TRANSLATION
For	one	who	is	not	renounced,	the	threefold	fruits	of	action—desirable,
undesirable	and	mixed—accrue	after	death.	But	those	who	are	in	the
renounced	order	of	life	have	no	such	results	to	suffer	or	enjoy.
PURPORT
A	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	or	in	the	mode	of	goodness	does	not	hate
anyone	or	anything	which	troubles	his	body.	He	does	work	in	the	proper	place
and	at	the	proper	time	without	fearing	the	troublesome	effects	of	his	duty.
Such	a	person	situated	in	transcendence	should	be	understood	to	be	most
intelligent	and	beyond	all	doubts	in	his	activities.
TEXTS	13-14
प ᇮ च ै त ा ि न
	
म ह ा ब ा ह ो
	
क ा र ण ा ि न
	
ि न ब ो ध
	
म े
	
।
स ा ङ ् ᇨ य े
	
क ृ त ा ᇳ त े
	
प ् र ो ᇧ त ा ि न
	
ि स ሬ य े
	
स व ᆼ क म ᆼ ण ा म ्
	
॥
१ ३
॥
अ ि ध ᇾ ठ ा न ं
	
त थ ा
	
क त ा ᆼ
	
क र ण ं
	
च
	
प ृ थ ि ᇩ व ध म ्
	
।
ि व ि व ध ा ᇽ च
	
प ृ थ ᇧ च े ᇾ ट ा
	
द ै व ं
	
च ै व ा त ् र
	
प ᇮ च म म ्
	
॥
१ ४
॥
pañcaitāni	mahā-bāho
kāraṇāni	nibodha	me
sāṅkhye	kṛtānte	proktāni
siddhaye	sarva-karmaṇām
adhiṣṭhānaṁ	tathā	kartā
karaṇaṁ	ca	pṛthag-vidham
vividhāś	ca	pṛthak	ceṣṭā
daivaṁ	caivātra	pañcamam
pañca—
five;	
etāni—
all	these;	
mahā-bāho
—O	mighty-armed	one;	
kāraṇāni
—
cause;	
nibodha—
just	understand;	
me—
from	Me;	
sāṅkhye—
in	the	
Vedas;
kṛtānte—
after	performance;	
proktāni—
said;	
siddhaye—
perfection;	
sarva—
all;
karmaṇām—
actuated;	
adhiṣṭhānam—
place;	
tathā—
also;	
kartā
—worker;
karaṇam	ca
—and	instruments;	
pṛthak-vidham—
different	kinds;	
vividhāḥ	ca
—
varieties;	
pṛthak—
separately;	
ceṣṭāḥ—
endeavor;	
daivam—
the	Supreme;	
ca—
also;	
eva—
certainly;	
atra—
here;	
pañcamam
—five.
TRANSLATION
O	mighty-armed	Arjuna,	learn	from	Me	of	the	five	factors	which	bring
about	the	accomplishment	of	all	action.	These	are	declared	in	sāṅkhya
philosophy	to	be	the	place	of	action,	the	performer,	the	senses,	the
endeavor,	and	ultimately	the	Supersoul.
PURPORT
A	question	may	be	raised	that	since	any	activity	performed	must	have	some
reaction,	how	is	it	that	the	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	does	not	suffer	or
enjoy	the	reactions	of	work?	The	Lord	is	citing	
Vedānta	
philosophy	to	show
how	this	is	possible.	He	says	that	there	are	five	causes	for	all	activities	and	for
success	in	all	activity,	and	one	should	know	these	five	causes.	
Sāṅkhya	
means
the	stalk	of	knowledge,	and	
Vedānta	
is	the	final	stalk	of	knowledge	accepted
by	all	leading	
ācāryas.	
Even	Śaṅkara	accepts	
Vedānta-sūtra	
as	such.
Therefore	such	authority	should	be	consulted.
The	ultimate	will	is	invested	in	the	Supersoul,	as	it	is	stated	in	the	
Gītā,
"sarvasya	cāhaṁ	hṛdi."	
He	is	engaging	everyone	in	certain	activities.	Acts
done	under	His	direction	from	within	yield	no	reaction,	either	in	this	life	or	in
the	life	after	death.
The	instruments	of	action	are	the	senses,	and	by	senses	the	soul	acts	in
various	ways,	and	for	each	and	every	action	there	is	a	different	endeavor.	But
all	one's	activities	depend	on	the	will	of	the	Supersoul,	who	is	seated	within
the	heart	as	a	friend.	The	Supreme	Lord	is	the	super	cause.	Under	these
circumstances,	he	who	is	acting	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	under	the	direction	of
the	Supersoul	situated	within	the	heart	is	naturally	not	bound	by	any	activity.
Those	in	complete	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	are	not	ultimately	responsible	for
their	actions.	Everything	is	dependent	on	the	supreme	will,	the	Supersoul,	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.
TEXT	15
श र ी र व ा ङ ् म न ो ि भ य ᆼ ᇰ क म ᆼ
	
प ् र ा र भ त े
	
न र ः
	
।
ᇳ य ा ᇹ य ं
	
व ा
	
ि व प र ी त ं
	
व ा
	
प ᇮ च ै त े
	
त ᇿ य
	
ह े त व ः
	
॥
१ ५
॥śarīra-vāṅmanobhir	yat
karma	prārabhate	naraḥ
nyāyyaṁ	vā	viparītaṁ	vā
pañcaite	tasya	hetavaḥ
śarīra—
body;	
vāk—
speech;	
manobhiḥ—
by	the	mind;	
yat
—anything;	
karma
—work;	
prārabhate—
begins;	
naraḥ—
a	person;	
nyāyyam
—right;	
vā
—or;
viparītam—
the	opposite;	
vā
—or;
	pañca—
five;	
ete—
all	these;	
tasya—
its;
hetavaḥ—
causes.
TRANSLATION
Whatever	right	or	wrong	action	a	man	performs	by	body,	mind	or
speech	is	caused	by	these	five	factors.
PURPORT
The	words	"right"	and	"wrong"	are	very	significant	in	this	verse.	Right
work	is	work	done	in	terms	of	the	prescribed	directions	in	the	scriptures,	and
wrong	work	is	work	done	against	the	principles	of	the	scriptural	injunctions.
But	whatever	is	done	requires	these	five	factors	for	its	complete	performance.
TEXT	16
त त ् र ै व ं
	
स ि त
	
क त ा ᆼ र म ा ᇰ म ा न ं
	
क े व ल ं
	
त ु
	
य ः
	
।
प ᇽ य ᇰ य क ृ त ब ु द ् ि ध ᇰ व ा ᇳ न
	
स
	
प ᇽ य ि त
	
द ु म ᆼ ि त ः
	
॥
१ ६
॥
tatraivaṁ	sati	kartāram
ātmānaṁ	kevalaṁ	tu	yaḥ
paśyaty	akṛta-buddhitvān
na	sa	paśyati	durmatiḥ
tatra—
there;	
evam—
certainly;	
sati—
being	thus;	
kartāram—
of	the	worker;
ātmānam—
the	soul;	
kevalam—
only;	
tu—
but;	
yaḥ—
anyone;	
paśyati—
sees;
akṛta-buddhitvāt—
due	to	unintelligence;	
na—
never;	
saḥ—
he;	
paśyati—
sees;
durmatiḥ—
foolish.TRANSLATION
Therefore	one	who	thinks	himself	the	only	doer,	not	considering	the	five
factors,	is	certainly	not	very	intelligent	and	cannot	see	things	as	they	are.
PURPORT
A	foolish	person	cannot	understand	that	the	Supersoul	is	sitting	as	a	friend
within	and	conducting	his	actions.	Although	the	material	causes	are	the	place,
the	worker,	the	endeavor	and	the	senses,	the	final	cause	is	the	Supreme,	the
Personality	of	Godhead.	Therefore,	one	should	see	not	only	the	four	material
causes,	but	the	supreme	efficient	cause	as	well.	One	who	does	not	see	the
Supreme	thinks	himself	to	be	the	instrument.
TEXT	17
य ᇿ य
	
न ा ह ं क ृ त ो
	
भ ा व ो
	
ब ु द ् ि ध य ᆼ ᇿ य
	
न
	
ि ल ᇴ य त े
	
।
ह ᇰ व ा ऽ ि प
	
स
	
इ म ा ँ ᇺ ल ो क ा ᇳ न
	
ह ि ᇳ त
	
न
	
ि न ब ᇲ य त े
	
॥
१ ७
॥
yasya	nāhaṅkṛto	bhāvo
buddhir	yasya	na	lipyate
hatvāpi	sa	imāl̐	lokān
na	hanti	na	nibadhyate
yasya—
of	one	who;	
na—
never;	
ahaṅkṛtaḥ—
false	ego;	
bhāvaḥ—
nature;
buddhiḥ—
intelligence;	
yasya—
one	who;	
na—
never;	
lipyate—
is	attached;
hatvā	api—
even	killing;	
saḥ—
he;	
imān—
this;	
lokān—
world;	
na—
never;	
hanti
—
kills;	
na—
never;	
nibadhyate—
becomes	entangled.
TRANSLATION
One	who	is	not	motivated	by	false	ego,	whose	intelligence	is	not
entangled,	though	he	kills	men	in	this	world,	is	not	the	slayer.	Nor	is	he
bound	by	his	actions.PURPORT
In	this	verse	the	Lord	informs	Arjuna	that	the	desire	not	to	fight	arises	from
false	ego.	Arjuna	thought	himself	to	be	the	doer	of	action,	but	he	did	not
consider	the	Supreme	sanction	within	and	without.	If	one	does	not	know	that	a
super	sanction	is	there,	why	should	he	act?	But	one	who	knows	the	instrument
of	work,	himself	as	the	worker,	and	the	Supreme	Lord	as	the	supreme
sanctioner,	is	perfect	in	doing	everything.	Such	a	person	is	never	in	illusion.
Personal	activity	and	responsibility	arise	from	false	ego	and	godlessness,	or	a
lack	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	Anyone	who	is	acting	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness
under	the	direction	of	the	Supersoul	or	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
even	though	killing,	does	not	kill.	Nor	is	he	ever	affected	with	the	reaction	of
such	killing.	When	a	soldier	kills	under	the	command	of	a	superior	officer,	he
is	not	subject	to	be	judged.	But	if	a	soldier	kills	on	his	own	personal	account,
then	he	is	certainly	judged	by	a	court	of	law.
TEXT	18
ᇥ ा न ं
	
ᇥ े य ं
	
प ि र ᇥ ा त ा
	
ि त ् र ि व ध ा
	
क म ᆼ च ो द न ा
	
।
क र ण ं
	
क म ᆼ
	
क त ᆹ ि त
	
ि त ् र ि व ध ः
	
क म ᆼ स ं ग ् र ह ः
	
॥
१ ८
॥
jñānaṁ	jñeyaṁ	parijñātā
tri-vidhā	karma-codanā
karaṇaṁ	karma	karteti
tri-vidhaḥ	karma	saṅgrahaḥ
jñānam
—knowledge;	
jñeyam
—objective;	
parijñātā
—the	knower;	
tri-vidhā
—	
three	kinds;	
karma
—work;	
codanā
—impetus;	
karaṇam
—the	senses;	
karma
—work;	
kartā
—the	doer;	
iti
—thus;	
tri-vidhaḥ—
three	kinds;	
karma
—work;
saṅgrahaḥ—
accumulation.
TRANSLATION
Knowledge,	the	object	of	knowledge	and	the	knower	are	the	three
factors	which	motivate	action;	the	senses,	the	work	and	the	doer	comprisethe	threefold	basis	of	action.
PURPORT
There	are	three	kinds	of	impetus	for	daily	work:	knowledge,	the	object	of
knowledge	and	the	knower.	The	instruments	of	work,	the	work	itself	and	the
worker	are	called	the	constituents	of	work.	Any	work	done	by	any	human
being	has	these	elements.	Before	one	acts,	there	is	some	impetus,	which	is
called	inspiration.	Any	solution	arrived	at	before	work	is	actualized	is	a	subtle
form	of	work.	Then	work	takes	the	form	of	action.	First	one	has	to	undergo
the	psychological	processes	of	thinking,	feeling	and	willing,	and	that	is	called
impetus.	Actually	the	faith	to	perform	acts	is	called	knowledge.	The
inspiration	to	work	is	the	same	if	it	comes	from	the	scripture	or	from	the
instruction	of	the	spiritual	master.	When	the	inspiration	is	there	and	the	worker
is	there,	then	actual	activity	takes	place	by	the	help	of	the	senses.	The	mind	is
the	center	of	all	senses,	and	the	object	is	work	itself.	These	are	the	different
phases	of	work	as	described	in	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
The	sum	total	of	all	activities
is	called	accumulation	of	work.
TEXT	19
ᇥ ा न ं
	
क म ᆼ
	
च
	
क त ा ᆼ
	
च
	
ि त ् र ध ै व
	
ग ु ण भ े द त ः
	
।
प ् र ो ᇫ य त े
	
ग ु ण स ङ ् ᇨ य ा न े
	
य थ ा व ᇫ छ ृ ण ु
	
त ा ᇳ य ि प
	
॥
१ ९
॥
jñānaṁ	karma	ca	kartā	ca
tridhaiva	guṇa-bhedataḥ
procyate	guṇa-saṅkhyāne
yathāvac	chṛṇu	tāny	api
jñānam—
knowledge;	
karma—
work;	
ca—
also;	
kartā—
worker;	
ca—
also;
tridhā—
three	kinds;	
eva—
certainly;	
guṇa-bhedataḥ—
in	terms	of	different
modes	of	material	nature;	
procyate—
is	said;
	guṇa-saṅkhyāne—
in	terms	of
different	modes;	
yathāvat—
as	they	act;	
śṛṇu—
hear;	
tāni—
all	of	them;	
api
—
also.
TRANSLATIONIn	accordance	with	the	three	modes	of	material	nature,	there	are	three
kinds	of	knowledge,	action,	and	performers	of	action.	Listen	as	I	describe
them.
PURPORT
In	the	Fourteenth	Chapter	the	three	divisions	of	the	modes	of	material
nature	were	elaborately	described.	In	that	chapter	it	was	said	that	the	mode	of
goodness	is	illuminating,	the	mode	of	passion	materialistic,	and	the	mode	of
ignorance	conducive	to	laziness	and	indolence.	All	the	modes	of	material
nature	are	binding;	they	are	not	sources	of	liberation.	Even	in	the	mode	of
goodness	one	is	conditioned.	In	the	Seventeenth	Chapter,	the	different	types	of
worship	by	different	types	of	men	in	different	modes	of	material	nature	were
described.	In	this	verse,	the	Lord	wishes	to	speak	about	the	different	types	of
knowledge,	workers,	and	work	itself	according	to	the	three	material	modes.
TEXT	20
स व ᆼ भ ू त े ष ु
	
य े न ै क ं
	
भ ा व म ᇼ य य म ी ᇤ त े
	
।
अ ि व भ ᇧ त ं
	
ि व भ ᇧ त े ष ु
	
त ᇬ ᇥ ा न ं
	
ि व द ् ि ध
	
स ा ि ᇰ ᇰ व क म ्
	
॥
२ ०
॥
sarva-bhūteṣu	yenaikaṁ
bhāvam	avyayam	īkṣate
avibhaktaṁ	vibhakteṣu
taj	jñānaṁ	viddhi	sāttvikam
sarva-bhūteṣu
—in	all	living	entities;	
yena
—by	whom;	
ekam
—one;	
bhāvam
—situation;	
avyayam
—imperishable;	
īkṣate
—does	see;	
avibhaktam
—
undivided;	
vibhakteṣu
—in	the	numberless	divided;	
tat
—that;	
jñānam
—
knowledge;	
viddhi
—knows;	
sāttvikam
—in	the	mode	of	goodness.
TRANSLATION
That	knowledge	by	which	one	undivided	spiritual	nature	is	seen	in	all
existences,	undivided	in	the	divided,	is	knowledge	in	the	mode	of
goodness.PURPORT
A	person	who	sees	one	spirit	soul	in	every	living	being,	whether	a	demigod,
human	being,	animal,	bird,	beast,	aquatic	or	plant,	possesses	knowledge	in	the
mode	of	goodness.	In	all	living	entities,	one	spirit	soul	is	there,	although	they
have	different	bodies	in	terms	of	their	previous	work.	As	described	in	the
Seventh	Chapter,	the	manifestation	of	the	living	force	in	every	body	is	due	to
the	superior	nature	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	Thus	to	see	that	one	superior	nature,
that	living	force,	in	every	body	is	to	see	in	the	mode	of	goodness.	That	living
energy	is	imperishable,	although	the	bodies	are	perishable.	The	difference	is
perceived	in	terms	of	the	body	because	there	are	many	forms	of	material
existence	in	conditional	life;	therefore	they	appear	to	be	divided.	Such
impersonal	knowledge	finally	leads	to	self-realization.
TEXT	21
प ृ थ ᇧ ᇰ व े न
	
त ु
	
य ᇬ ᇥ ा न ं
	
न ा न ा भ ा व ा ᇳ प ृ थ ि ᇩ व ध ा न ्
	
।
व े ि ሧ
	
स व ᆹ ष ु
	
भ ू त े ष ु
	
त ᇬ ᇥ ा न ं
	
ि व द ् ि ध
	
र ा ज स म ्
	
॥
२ १
॥
pṛthaktvena	tu	yaj	jñānaṁ
nānā-bhāvān	pṛthag-vidhān
vetti	sarveṣu	bhūteṣu
taj	jñānaṁ	viddhi	rājasam
pṛthaktvena
—because	of	division;	
tu
—but;	
yat	jñānam—
which	knowledge;
nānā-bhāvān
—multifarious	situations;	
pṛthak-vidhān
—differently;	
vetti
—one
who	knows;	
sarveṣu
—in	all;	
bhūteṣu
—living	entities;	
tat	jñānam
—that
knowledge;	
viddhi
—must	be	known;	
rājasam
—in	terms	of	passion.
TRANSLATION
That	knowledge	by	which	a	different	type	of	living	entity	is	seen	to	be
dwelling	in	different	bodies	is	knowledge	in	the	mode	of	passion.
PURPORTThe	concept	that	the	material	body	is	the	living	entity	and	that	with	the
destruction	of	the	body	the	consciousness	is	also	destroyed	is	called
knowledge	in	the	mode	of	passion.	According	to	that	knowledge,	bodies	differ
from	one	another	because	of	the	development	of	different	types	of
consciousness,	otherwise	there	is	no	separate	soul	which	manifests
consciousness.	The	body	is	itself	the	soul,	and	there	is	no	separate	soul	beyond
this	body.	According	to	such	knowledge,	consciousness	is	temporary.	Or	else
there	are	no	individual	souls,	but	there	is	an	all-pervading	soul,	which	is	full
of	knowledge,	and	this	body	is	a	manifestation	of	temporary	ignorance.	Or
beyond	this	body	there	is	no	special	individual	or	Supreme	Soul.	All	such
conceptions	are	considered	products	of	the	mode	of	passion.
TEXT	22
य ሧ ु
	
क ृ ᇰ ᇿ न व द े क ि ᇿ म ᇳ क ा य ᆹ
	
स ᇧ त म ह ै त ु क म ्
	
।
अ त ᇰ ᇰ व ा थ ᆼ व द ᇺ प ं
	
च
	
त ሧ ा म स म ु द ा ᇦ त म ्
	
॥
२ २
॥
yat	tu	kṛtsnavad	ekasmin
kārye	saktam	ahaitukam
atattvārthavad	alpaṁ	ca
tat	tāmasam	udāhṛtam
yat—
that	which;	
tu—
but;	
kṛtsnavat—
all	in	all;	
ekasmin—
in	one;	
kārye—
work;	
saktam—
attached;	
ahaitukam—
without	cause;	
atattva-arthavat—
without	reality;	
alpam	ca—
and	very	meager;	
tat—
that;	
tāmasam—
in	the	mode
of	darkness;	
udāhṛtam—
is	spoken.
TRANSLATION
And	that	knowledge	by	which	one	is	attached	to	one	kind	of	work	as
the	all	in	all,	without	knowledge	of	the	truth,	and	which	is	very	meager,	is
said	to	be	in	the	mode	of	darkness.
PURPORT
The	"knowledge"	of	the	common	man	is	always	in	the	mode	of	darkness	orignorance	because	every	living	entity	in	conditional	life	is	born	into	the	mode
of	ignorance.	One	who	does	not	develop	knowledge	through	the	authorities	or
scriptural	injunctions	has	knowledge	that	is	limited	to	the	body.	He	is	not
concerned	about	acting	in	terms	of	the	directions	of	scripture.	For	him	God	is
money,	and	knowledge	means	the	satisfaction	of	bodily	demands.	Such
knowledge	has	no	connection	with	the	Absolute	Truth.	It	is	more	or	less	like
the	knowledge	of	the	ordinary	animals:	the	knowledge	of	eating,	sleeping,
defending	and	mating.	Such	knowledge	is	described	here	as	the	product	of	the
mode	of	darkness.	In	other	words,	knowledge	concerning	the	spirit	soul
beyond	this	body	is	called	knowledge	in	the	mode	of	goodness,	and
knowledge	producing	many	theories	and	doctrines	by	dint	of	mundane	logic
and	mental	speculation	is	the	product	of	the	mode	of	passion,	and	knowledge
concerned	with	only	keeping	the	body	comfortable	is	said	to	be	in	the	mode	of
ignorance.
TEXT	23
ि न य त ं
	
स ङ ् ग र ि ह त म र ा ग ሲ े ष त ः
	
क ृ त म ्
	
।
अ फ ल प ् र े ᇴ स ु न ा
	
क म ᆼ
	
य ሧ ᇰ स ा ि ᇰ ᇰ व क म ु ᇫ य त े
	
॥
२ ३
॥
niyataṁ	saṅga-rahitam
arāga-dveṣataḥ	kṛtam
aphala-prepsunā	karma
yat	tat	sāttvikam	ucyate
niyatam—
regulative;	
saṅga-rahitam—
without	attachment;	
arāga-dveṣataḥ
—
without	love	or	hatred;	
kṛtam—
done;	
aphala-prepsunā—
without	fruitive
result;	
karma—
acts;	
yat—
that	which;	
tat—
that;	
sāttvikam—
in	the	mode	of
goodness;	
ucyate—
is	called.
TRANSLATION
As	for	actions,	that	action	in	accordance	with	duty,	which	is	performed
without	attachment,	without	love	or	hate,	by	one	who	has	renounced
fruitive	results,	is	called	action	in	the	mode	of	goodness.PURPORT
Regulated	occupational	duties,	as	prescribed	in	the	scriptures	in	terms	of	the
different	orders	and	divisions	of	society,	performed	without	attachment	or
proprietary	rights	and	therefore	without	any	love	or	hatred	and	performed	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	for	the	satisfaction	of	the	Supreme,	without	self-
satisfaction	or	self-gratification,	are	called	actions	in	the	mode	of	goodness.
TEXT	24
य ሧ ु
	
क ा म े ᇴ स ु न ा
	
क म ᆼ
	
स ा ह ं क ा र े ण
	
व ा
	
प ु न ः
	
।
ि क ् र य त े
	
ब ह ु ल ा य ा स ं
	
त द ् र ा ज स म ु द ा ᇦ त म ्
	
॥
२ ४
॥
yat	tu	kāmepsunā	karma
sāhaṅkāreṇa	vā	punaḥ
kriyate	bahulāyāsaṁ
tad	rājasam	udāhṛtam
yat
—that	which;	
tu
—but;	
kāma-īpsunā
—with	fruitive	result;	
karma
—
work;	
sāhaṅkāreṇa—
with	ego;	
vā
—or;	
punaḥ
—again;	
kriyate
—performed;
bahula-āyāsam—
with	great	labor;	
tat
—that;	
rājasam
—in	the	mode	of
passion;	
udāhṛtam—
is	said	to	be.
TRANSLATION
But	action	performed	with	great	effort	by	one	seeking	to	gratify	his
desires,	and	which	is	enacted	from	a	sense	of	false	ego,	is	called	action	in
the	mode	of	passion.
TEXT	25
अ न ु ब ᇳ ध ं
	
ᇤ य ं
	
ि ह ं स ा म न प े ቎ य
	
च
	
प ौ ኄ ष म ्
	
।
म ो ह ा द ा र ᇷ य त े
	
क म ᆼ
	
य ሧ ሧ ा म स म ु ᇫ य त े
	
॥
२ ५
॥anubandhaṁ	kṣayaṁ	hiṁsām
anapekṣya	ca	pauruṣam
mohād	ārabhyate	karma
yat	tat	tāmasam	ucyate
anubandham—
future	bondage;	
kṣayam—
distracted;	
hiṁsām—
violence;
anapekṣya—
without	consideration	of	consequences;	
ca—
also;	
pauruṣam—
distressing	to	others;	
mohāt—
by	illusion;	
ārabhyate—
begun;	
karma—
work;
yat—
that;	
tat—
which;	
tāmasam—
in	the	mode	of	ignorance;	
ucyate—
is	said	to
be.
TRANSLATION
And	that	action	performed	in	ignorance	and	delusion	without
consideration	of	future	bondage	or	consequences,	which	inflicts	injury
and	is	impractical,	is	said	to	be	action	in	the	mode	of	ignorance.
PURPORT
One	has	to	give	account	of	one's	actions	to	the	state	or	to	the	agents	of	the
Supreme	Lord	called	the	Yamadūtas.	Irresponsible	work	is	distraction	because
it	destroys	the	regulative	principles	of	scriptural	injunction.	It	is	often	based
on	violence	and	is	distressing	to	other	living	entities.	Such	irresponsible	work
is	carried	out	in	the	light	of	one's	personal	experience.	This	is	called	illusion.
And	all	such	illusory	work	is	a	product	of	the	mode	of	ignorance.
TEXT	26
म ु ᇧ त स ङ ् ग ो न ह ं व ा द ी
	
ध ृ ᇰ य ु ᇰ स ा ह स म ि ᇳ व त ः
	
।
ि स ሬ ᆸ ि स ሬ ᆸ ो ि न ᆼ ि व ᆼ क ा र ः
	
क त ा ᆼ
	
स ा ि ᇰ ᇰ व क
	
उ ᇫ य त े
	
॥
२ ६
॥
mukta-saṅgo	'nahaṁvādī
dhṛty-utsāha-samanvitaḥ
siddhy-asiddhyor	nirvikāraḥ
kartā	sāttvika	ucyatemukta-saṅgaḥ—
liberated	from	all	material	association;	
anaham-vādī—
without	false	ego;	
dhṛti-utsāha—
with	great	enthusiasm;	
samanvitaḥ—
qualified	in	that	way;	
siddhi—
perfection;	
asiddhyoḥ—
failure;	
nirvikāraḥ—
without	change;	
kartā—
worker;	
sāttvikaḥ—
in	the	mode	of	goodness;	
ucyate
—
is	said	to	be.
TRANSLATION
The	worker	who	is	free	from	all	material	attachments	and	false	ego,
who	is	enthusiastic	and	resolute	and	who	is	indifferent	to	success	or
failure,	is	a	
worker	in	the	mode	of	goodness.
PURPORT
A	person	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	always	transcendental	to	the	material
modes	of	nature.	He	has	no	expectations	for	the	result	of	the	work	entrusted	to
him	because	he	is	above	false	ego	and	pride.	Still,	he	is	always	enthusiastic	till
the	completion	of	such	work.	He	does	not	worry	about	the	distress	undertaken;
he	is	always	enthusiastic.	He	does	not	care	for	success	or	failure;	he	is	equal
both	in	distress	or	happiness.	Such	a	worker	is	situated	in	the	mode	of
goodness.
TEXT	27
र ा ग ी
	
क म ᆼ फ ल प ् र े ᇴ स ु ल ु ᆼ ᇶ ध ो
	
ि ह ं स ा ᇰ म क ो ऽ श ु ि च ः
	
।
ह ष ᆼ श ो क ा ि ᇳ व त ः
	
क त ा ᆼ
	
र ा ज स ः
	
प ि र क ी ि त ᆼ त ः
	
॥
२ ७
॥
rāgī	karma-phala-prepsur
lubdho	hiṁsātmako	'śuciḥ
harṣa-śokānvitaḥ	kartā
rājasaḥ	parikīrtitaḥ
rāgī—
very	much	attached;	
karma-phala—
to	the	fruit	of	the	work;	
prepsuḥ
—
desiring;	
lubdhaḥ—
greedy;	
hiṁsā-ātmakaḥ—
and	always	envious;	
aśuciḥ
—
unclean;	
harṣa-śoka-anvitaḥ—
complicated,	with	joy	and	sorrow;	
kartā—
such
a	worker;	
rājasaḥ—
in	the	mode	of	passion;	
parikīrtitaḥ—	
is	declared.TRANSLATION
But	that	worker	who	is	attached	to	the	fruits	of	his	labor	and	who
passionately	wants	to	enjoy	them,	who	is	greedy,	envious	and	impure	and
moved	by	happiness	and	distress,	is	a	worker	in	the	mode	of	passion.
PURPORT
A	person	is	too	much	attached	to	certain	kind	of	work	or	to	the	result
because	he	has	too	much	attachment	for	materialism	or	hearth	and	home,	wife
and	children.	Such	a	person	has	no	desire	for	higher	elevation	of	life.	He	is
simply	concerned	with	making	this	world	as	materially	comfortable	as
possible.	He	is	generally	very	greedy,	and	he	thinks	that	anything	attained	by
him	is	permanent	and	never	to	be	lost.	Such	a	person	is	envious	of	others	and
prepared	to	do	anything	wrong	for	sense	gratification.	Therefore	such	a	person
is	unclean,	and	he	does	not	care	whether	his	earning	is	pure	or	impure.	He	is
very	happy	if	his	work	is	successful	and	very	much	distressed	when	his	work
is	not	successful.	Such	is	a	man	in	the	mode	of	passion.
TEXT	28
अ य ु ᇧ त ः
	
प ् र ा क ृ त ः
	
ᇿ त ᇶ ध ः
	
श ठ ो
	
न ै ᇾ क ृ ि त क ो ऽ ल स ः
	
।
ि व ष ा द ी
	
द ी घ ᆼ स ू त ् र ी
	
च
	
क त ा ᆼ
	
त ा म स
	
उ ᇫ य त े
	
॥
२ ८
॥
ayuktaḥ	prākṛtaḥ	stabdhaḥ
śaṭho	naiṣkṛtiko	'lasaḥ
viṣādī	dīrgha-sūtrī	ca
kartā	tāmasa	ucyate
ayuktaḥ
—without	reference	to	the	scriptural	injunctions;	
prākṛtaḥ—
materialistic;	
stabdhaḥ—
obstinate;	
śaṭhaḥ—
deceitful;	
naiṣkṛtikaḥ—
expert	in
insulting	others;	
alasaḥ—
lazy;	
viṣādī—
morose;	
dīrgha-sūtrī—
procrastinating;
ca—
also;	
kartā—
worker;	
tāmasaḥ
—in	the	mode	of	ignorance;	
ucyate
—is	said
to	be.TRANSLATION
And	that	worker	who	is	always	engaged	in	work	against	the	injunction
of	the	scripture,	who	is	materialistic,	obstinate,	cheating	and	expert	in
insulting	others,	who	is	lazy,	always	morose	and	procrastinating,	is	a
worker	in	the	mode	of	ignorance.
PURPORT
In	the	scriptural	injunctions	we	find	what	sort	of	work	should	be	performed
and	what	sort	of	work	should	not	be	performed.	Those	who	do	not	care	for
those	injunctions	engage	in	work	not	to	be	done,	and	such	persons	are
generally	materialistic.	They	work	according	to	the	modes	of	nature,	not
according	to	the	injunctions	of	the	scripture.	Such	workers	are	not	very	gentle,
and	generally	they	are	always	cunning	and	expert	in	insulting	others.	They	are
very	lazy;	even	though	they	have	some	duty,	they	do	not	do	it	properly,	and
they	put	it	aside	to	be	done	later	on.	Therefore	they	appear	to	be	morose.	They
procrastinate;	anything	which	can	be	done	in	an	hour	they	drag	on	for	years.
Such	workers	are	situated	in	the	mode	of	ignorance.
TEXT	29
ब ु ሬ े भ ᆹ द ं
	
ध ृ त े ᇽ च ै व
	
ग ु ण त ि ᇿ त ् र ि व ध ं
	
श ृ ण ु
	
।
प ् र ो ᇫ य म ा न म श े ष े ण
	
प ृ थ ᇧ ᇰ व े न
	
ध न ᇮ ज य
	
॥
२ ९
॥
buddher	bhedaṁ	dhṛteś	caiva
guṇatas	tri-vidhaṁ	śṛṇu
procyamānam	aśeṣeṇa
pṛthaktvena	dhanañjaya
buddheḥ—
of	intelligence;	
bhedam—
differences;	
dhṛteḥ—
of	steadiness;	
ca
—
also;	
eva—
certainly;	
guṇataḥ—
by	the	modes	of	material	nature;	
tri-vidham
—
the	three	kinds	of;	
śṛṇu
—just	hear;	
procyamānam—
as	described	by	Me;
aśeṣeṇa
—in	detail;	
pṛthaktvena
—differently;	
dhanañjaya—
O	winner	of
wealth.TRANSLATION
Now,	O	winner	of	wealth,	please	listen	as	I	tell	you	in	detail	of	the	three
kinds	of	understanding	and	determination	according	to	the	three	modes
of	nature.
PURPORT
Now	after	explaining	knowledge,	the	object	of	knowledge	and	the	knower,
in	three	different	divisions	according	to	modes	of	material	nature,	the	Lord	is
explaining	the	intelligence	and	determination	of	the	worker	in	the	same	way.
TEXT	30
प ् र व ृ ि ሧ ं
	
च
	
ि न व ृ ि ሧ ं
	
च
	
क ा य ा ᆼ क ा य ᆹ
	
भ य ा भ य े
	
।
ब ᇳ ध ं
	
म ो ᇤ ं
	
च
	
य ा
	
व े ि ሧ
	
ब ु द ् ि ध ः
	
स ा
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
स ा ि ᇰ ᇰ व क ी
	
॥
३ ०
॥
pravṛttiṁ	ca	nivṛttiṁ	ca
kāryākārye	bhayābhaye
bandhaṁ	mokṣaṁ	ca	yā	vetti
buddhiḥ	sā	pārtha	sāttvikī
pravṛttim—
deserving;	
ca—
also;	
nivṛttim—
not	deserving;	
kārya—
work;
akārye—
reaction;	
bhaya—
fearful;	
abhaye—
fearlessness;	
bandham
—
obligation;	
mokṣam	ca—
and	liberation;	
yā
—that	which;	
vetti—
knows;
buddhiḥ—	
understanding;	
sā
—that;	
pārtha
—O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
sāttvikī
—in	the
mode	of	goodness.
TRANSLATION
O	son	of	Pṛthā,	that	understanding	by	which	one	knows	what	ought	to
be	done	and	what	ought	not	to	be	done,	what	is	to	be	feared	and	what	is
not	to	be	feared,	what	is	binding	and	what	is	liberating,	that
understanding	is	established	in	the	mode	of	goodness.PURPORT
Actions	which	are	performed	in	terms	of	the	directions	of	the	scriptures	are
called	
pravṛtti,	
or	actions	that	deserve	to	be	performed,	and	actions	which	are
not	so	directed	are	not	to	be	performed.	One	who	does	not	know	the	scriptural
directions	becomes	entangled	in	the	actions	and	reactions	of	work.
Understanding	which	discriminates	by	intelligence	is	situated	in	the	mode	of
goodness.
TEXT	31
य य ा
	
ध म ᆼ म ध म ᆾ
	
च
	
क ा य ᆾ
	
च ा क ा य ᆼ म े व
	
च
	
।
अ य थ ा व ᇰ प ् र ज ा न ा ि त
	
ब ु द ् ि ध ः
	
स ा
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
र ा ज स ी
	
॥
३ १
॥
yayā	dharmam	adharmaṁ	ca
kāryaṁ	cākāryam	eva	ca
ayathāvat	prajānāti
buddhiḥ	sā	pārtha	rājasī
yayā—
by	which;	
dharmam—
principles	of	religion;	
adharmam	ca
—and
irreligion;	
kāryam
—work;	
ca—
also;	
akāryam
—what	ought	not	to	be	done;
eva
—certainly;	
ca
—also;	
ayathāvat
—not	perfectly;	
prajānati—
knows;	
buddhiḥ
—
intelligence;	
sā
—that;	
pārtha
—O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
rājasī—
in	the	mode	of
passion.
TRANSLATION
And	that	understanding	which	cannot	distinguish	between	the	religious
way	of	life	and	the	irreligious,	between	action	that	should	be	done	and
action	that	should	not	be	done,	that	imperfect	understanding,	O	son	of
Pṛthā,	is	in	the	mode	of	passion.
PURPORT
Intelligence	in	the	mode	of	passion	is	always	working	perversely.	It	acceptsreligions	which	are	not	actually	religions	and	rejects	actual	religion.	All	views
and	activities	are	misguided.	Men	of	passionate	intelligence	understand	a	great
soul	to	be	a	common	man	and	accept	a	common	man	as	a	great	soul.	They
think	truth	to	be	untruth	and	accept	untruth	as	truth.	In	all	activities	they
simply	take	the	wrong	path;	therefore	their	intelligence	is	in	the	mode	of
passion.
TEXT	32
अ ध म ᆾ
	
ध म ᆼ ि म ि त
	
य ा
	
म ᇳ य त े
	
त म स ा व ृ त ा
	
।
स व ा ᆼ थ ा ᆼ ि ᇳ व प र ी त ा ं ᇽ च
	
ब ु द ् ि ध ः
	
स ा
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
त ा म स ी
	
॥
३ २
॥
adharmaṁ	dharmam	iti	yā
manyate	tamasāvṛtā
sarvārthān	viparītāṁś	ca
buddhiḥ	sā	pārtha	tāmasī
adharmam—
irreligion;	
dharmam—
religion;	
iti—
thus;	
yā
—which;	
manyate
—
thinks;	
tamasā—
by	illusion;	
āvṛtā
—covered;	
sarva-arthān—
all	things;
viparītān—
the	wrong	direction;	
ca—
also;	
buddhiḥ—
intelligence;	
sa—
that;
pārtha
—O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
tāmasī—
the	mode	of	ignorance.
TRANSLATION
That	understanding	which	considers	irreligion	to	be	religion	and
religion	to	be	irreligion,	under	the	spell	of	illusion	and	darkness,	and
strives	always	in	the	wrong	direction,	O	Pārtha,	is	in	the	mode	of
ignorance.
TEXT	33
ध ृ ᇰ य ा
	
य य ा
	
ध ा र य त े
	
म न ः प ् र ा ण े ि ᇳ द ् र य ि क ् र य ा ः
	
।
य ो ग े न ा ᇼ य ि भ च ा ि र ᇯ य ा
	
ध ृ ि त ः
	
स ा
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
स ा ि ᇰ ᇰ व क ी
	
॥
३ ३
॥
dhṛtyā	yayā	dhārayate
manaḥ	prāṇendriya-kriyāḥyogenāvyabhicāriṇyā
dhṛtiḥ	sā	pārtha	sāttvikī
dhṛtyā—
determination;	
yayā—
by	which;	
dhārayate—
is	sustained;	
manaḥ—
mind;	
prāṇa—
life;	
indriya—
senses;	
kriyāḥ
—activities;	
yogena—
by
	yoga
practice;	
avyabhicāriṇyā—
without	any	break;	
dhṛtiḥ—
such	determination;	
sā
—that;	
pārtha
—O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
sāttvikī—
in	the	mode	of	goodness.
TRANSLATION
O	son	of	Pṛthā,	that	determination	which	is	unbreakable,	which	is
sustained	with	steadfastness	by	yoga	practice,	and	thus	controls	the	mind,
life,	and	the	acts	of	the	senses,	is	in	the	mode	of	goodness.
PURPORT
Yoga
	is	a	means	to	understand	the	Supreme	Soul.	One	who	is	steadily	fixed
in	the	Supreme	Soul	with	determination,	concentrating	one's	mind,	life	and
sensual	activities	on	the	Supreme,	engages	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	That	sort
of	determination	is	in	the	mode	of	goodness.	The	word	
avyabhicāriṇya	
is	very
significant,	for	it	refers	to	persons	who	are	engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness
and	are	never	deviated	by	any	other	activity.
TEXT	34
य य ा
	
त ु
	
ध म ᆼ क ा म ा थ ा ᆼ ᇳ ध ृ ᇰ य ा
	
ध ा र य त े ऽ ज ु ᆼ न
	
।
प ् र स ङ ् ग े न
	
फ ल ा क ा ङ ् ᇤ ी
	
ध ृ ि त ः
	
स ा
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
र ा ज स ी
	
॥
३ ४
॥
yayā	tu	dharma-kāmārthān
dhṛtyā	dhārayate	'rjuna
prasaṅgena	phalākāṅkṣī
dhṛtiḥ	sā	pārtha	rājasī
yayā
—by	which;	
tu
—but;	
dharma-kāma-arthān—
for	religiosity	and
economic	development;	
dhṛtyā—
by	determination;	
dhārayate—
in	such	terms;
arjuna
—O	Arjuna;	
prasaṅgena—
for	that;	
phala-ākāṅkṣī
—desiring	fruitiveresult;	
dhṛtiḥ—
determination;	
sā
—that;	
pārtha—
O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
rājasī
—in
the	mode	of	passion.
TRANSLATION
And	that	determination	by	which	one	holds	fast	to	fruitive	result	in
religion,	economic	development	and	sense	gratification	is	of	the	nature	of
passion,	O	Arjuna.
PURPORT
Any	person	who	is	always	desirous	of	fruitive	results	in	religious	or
economic	activities,	whose	only	desire	is	sense	gratification,	and	whose	mind,
life	and	senses	are	thus	engaged,	is	in	the	mode	of	passion.
TEXT	35
य य ा
	
ᇿ व ᇴ न ं
	
भ य ं
	
श ो क ं
	
ि व ष ा द ं
	
म द म े व
	
च
	
।
न
	
ि व म ु ᇮ च ि त
	
द ु म ᆹ ध ा
	
ध ृ ि त ः
	
स ा
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
त ा म स ी
	
॥
३ ५
॥
yayā	svapnaṁ	bhayaṁ	śokaṁ
viṣādaṁ	madam	eva	ca
na	vimuñcati	durmedhā
dhṛtiḥ	sā	pārtha	tāmasī
yayā
—by	which;	
svapnam
—dream;	
bhayam—
fearfulness;	
śokam—
lamentation;	
viṣādam—
moroseness;	
madam
—illusion;	
eva
—certainly;	
ca—
also;	
na
—never;	
vimuñcati—
is	liberated;	
durmedhāḥ
—unintelligent;	
dhṛtiḥ—
determination;	
sā
—that;	
pārtha
—O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
tāmasī
—in	the	mode	of
ignorance.
TRANSLATION
And	that	determination	which	cannot	go	beyond	dreaming,	fearfulness,
lamentation,	moroseness,	and	illusion—such	unintelligent	determination
is	in	the	mode	of	darkness.PURPORT
It	should	not	be	concluded	that	a	person	in	the	mode	of	goodness	does	not
dream.	Here	dream	means	too	much	sleep.	Dream	is	always	present;	either	in
the	mode	of	goodness,	passion	or	ignorance,	dream	is	a	natural	occurrence.
But	those	who	cannot	avoid	oversleeping,	who	cannot	avoid	the	pride	of
enjoying	material	objects	and	who	are	always	dreaming	of	lording	it	over	the
material	world,	whose	life,	mind,	and	senses	are	thus	engaged,	are	considered
to	be	in	the	mode	of	ignorance.
TEXTS	36-37
स ु ख ं
	
ि ᇰ व द ा न ी ं
	
ि त ् र ि व ध ं
	
श ृ ण ु
	
म े
	
भ र त ष ᆼ भ
	
।
अ ᇷ य ा स ा द ् र म त े
	
य त ् र
	
द ु ः ख ा ᇳ त ं
	
च
	
ि न ग ᇫ छ ि त
	
॥
३ ६
॥
य ሧ द ग ् र े
	
ि व ष ि म व
	
प ि र ण ा म े ऽ म ृ त ो प म म ्
	
।
त ᇰ स ु ख ं
	
स ा ि ᇰ ᇰ व क ं
	
प ् र ो ᇧ त म ा ᇰ म ब ु द ् ि ध प ् र स ा द ज म ्
	
॥
३ ७
॥
sukhaṁ	tv	idānīṁ	tri-vidhaṁ
śṛṇu	me	bharatarṣabha
abhyāsād	ramate	yatra
duḥkhāntaṁ	ca	nigacchati
yat	tad	agre	viṣam	iva
pariṇāme	'mṛtopamam
tat	sukhaṁ	sāttvikaṁ	proktam
ātma-buddhi-prasāda-jam
sukham—
happiness;	
tu—
but;	
idānīm—
now;	
tri-vidham—
three	kinds;	
śṛṇu
—hear;	
me—
from	Me;	
bharatarṣabha
—O	best	amongst	the	Bhāratas;
abhyāsāt—
by	practice;	
ramate—
enjoyer;	
yatra—
where;	
duḥkha—
distress;
antam—
end;	
ca—
also;	
nigacchati—
gains;	
yat—
that	which;	
tat—
that;	
agre—
in	the	beginning;	
viṣam	iva—
like	poison;	
pariṇāme—
at	the	end;	
amṛta—
nectar;	
upamam—
compared	to;	
tat—
that;	
sukham—
happiness;	
sāttvikam—	
in
the	mode	of	goodness;	
proktam—
is	said;	
ātma—
self;	
buddhi—
intelligence;
prasāda-jam—
satisfactory.TRANSLATION
O	best	of	the	Bhāratas,	now	please	hear	from	Me	about	the	three	kinds
of	happiness	which	the	conditioned	soul	enjoys,	and	by	which	he
sometimes	comes	to	the	end	of	all	distress.	That	which	in	the	beginning
may	be	just	like	poison	but	at	the	end	is	just	like	nectar	and	which
awakens	one	to	self-realization	is	said	to	be	happiness	in	the	mode	of
goodness.
PURPORT
A	conditioned	soul	tries	to	enjoy	material	happiness	again	and	again.	Thus
he	chews	the	chewed,	but,	sometimes,	in	the	course	of	such	enjoyment,	he
becomes	relieved	from	material	entanglement	by	association	with	a	great	soul.
In	other	words,	a	conditioned	soul	is	always	engaged	in	some	type	of	sense
gratification,	but	when	he	understands	by	good	association	that	it	is	only	a
repetition	of	the	same	thing,	and	he	is	awakened	to	his	real	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness,	he	is	sometimes	relieved	from	such	repetitive	so-called
happiness.
In	the	pursuit	of	self-realization,	one	has	to	follow	many	rules	and
regulations	to	control	the	mind	and	the	senses	and	to	concentrate	the	mind	on
the	Self.	All	these	procedures	are	very	difficult,	bitter	like	poison,	but	if	one	is
successful	in	following	the	regulations	and	comes	to	the	transcendental
position,	he	begins	to	drink	real	nectar,	and	he	enjoys	life.
TEXT	38
ि व ष य े ि ᇳ द ् र य स ं य ो ग ा ሱ ሧ द ग ् र े ऽ म ृ त ो प म म ्
	
।
प ि र ण ा म े
	
ि व ष ि म व
	
त ᇰ स ु ख ं
	
र ा ज स ं
	
ᇿ म ृ त म ्
	
॥
३ ८
॥
viṣayendriya-saṁyogād
yat	tad	agre	'mṛtopamam
pariṇāme	viṣam	iva
tat	sukhaṁ	rājasaṁ	smṛtamviṣaya
—objects	of	sense;	
indriya
—senses;	
saṁyogāt
—combination;	
yat
—
that;	
tat
—which;	
agre
—in	the	beginning;	
amṛta-upamam
—just	like	nectar;
pariṇāme
—at	the	end;	
viṣam	iva
—like	poison;	
tat
—that;	
sukham—	
happiness;
rājasam
—in	the	mode	of	passion;	
smṛtam
—is	considered.
TRANSLATION
That	happiness	which	is	derived	from	contact	of	the	senses	with	their
objects	and	which	appears	like	nectar	at	first	but	poison	at	the	end	is	said
to	be	of	the	nature	of	passion.
PURPORT
A	young	man	and	a	young	woman	meet,	and	the	senses	drive	the	young
man	to	see	her,	to	touch	her	and	to	have	sexual	intercourse.	In	the	beginning
this	may	be	very	pleasing	to	the	senses,	but	at	the	end,	or	after	some	time,	it
becomes	just	like	poison.	They	are	separated	or	there	is	divorce,	there	is
lamentation,	there	is	sorrow,	etc.	Such	happiness	is	always	in	the	mode	of
passion.	Happiness	derived	from	a	combination	of	the	senses	and	the	sense
objects	is	always	a	cause	of	distress	and	should	be	avoided	by	all	means.
TEXT	39
य द ग ् र े
	
च ा न ु ब ᇳ ध े
	
च
	
स ु ख ं
	
म ो ह न म ा ᇰ म न ः
	
।
ि न द ् र ा ल ᇿ य प ् र म ा द ो ᇰ थ ं
	
त ሧ ा म स म ु द ा ᇦ त म ्
	
॥
३ ९
॥
yad	agre	cānubandhe	ca
sukhaṁ	mohanam	ātmanaḥ
nidrālasya-pramādotthaṁ
tat	tāmasam	udāhṛtam
yat—
that	which;	
agre
—in	the	beginning;	
ca
—also;	
anubandhe—
by
binding;	
ca—
also;	
sukham—
happiness;	
mohanam—
illusion;	
ātmanaḥ—
of	the
self;	
nidrā—
sleeping;	
ālasya—
laziness;	
pramāda—
illusion;	
uttham—
produced	of;	
tat—
that;	
tāmasam—
in	the	mode	of	ignorance;	
udāhṛtam—
issaid
to	be.TRANSLATION
And	that	happiness	which	is	blind	to	self-realization,	which	is	delusion
from	beginning	to	end	and	which	arises	from	sleep,	laziness	and	illusion	is
said	to	be	of	the	nature	of	ignorance.
PURPORT
One	who	takes	pleasure	in	laziness	and	in	sleep	is	certainly	in	the	mode	of
darkness,	and	one	who	has	no	idea	how	to	act	and	how	not	to	act	is	also	in	the
mode	of	ignorance.	For	the	person	in	the	mode	of	ignorance,	everything	is
illusion.	There	is	no	happiness	either	in	the	beginning	or	the	end.	For	the
person	in	the	mode	of	passion	there	might	be	some	kind	of	ephemeral
happiness	in	the	beginning	and	at	the	end	distress,	but	for	the	person	in	the
mode	of	ignorance	there	is	only	distress	both	in	the	beginning	and	at	the	end.
TEXT	40
न
	
त द ि ᇿ त
	
प ृ ि थ ᇼ य ा ं
	
व ा
	
ि द ि व
	
द े व े ष ु
	
व ा
	
प ु न ः
	
।
स ᇰ ᇰ व ं
	
प ् र क ृ ि त ज ै म ु ᆼ ᇧ त ं
	
य द े ि भ ः
	
ᇿ य ा ि ቓ र ि भ ग ु ᆼ ण ै ः
	
॥
४ ०
॥
na	tad	asti	pṛthivyāṁ	vā
divi	deveṣu	vā	punaḥ
sattvaṁ	prakṛti-jair	muktaṁ
yad	ebhiḥ	syāt	tribhir	guṇaiḥ
na—
not;	
tat—
that;	
asti—
there	is;	
pṛthivyām—
within	the	universe;	
vā
—or;
divi—
in	the	higher	planetary	system;	
deveṣu—
amongst	the	demigods;	
vā
—or;
punaḥ—
again;	
sattvam—
existence;	
prakṛti-jaiḥ—
under	the	influence	of
material	nature;	
muktam—
liberated;	
yat—
that;	
ebhiḥ—
by	this;	
syāt—
so
becomes;	
tribhiḥ—
by	three;	
guṇaiḥ—
modes	of	material	nature.
TRANSLATION
There	is	no	being	existing,	either	here	or	among	the	demigods	in	thehigher	planetary	systems,	which	is	freed	from	the	three	modes	of	material
nature.
PURPORT
The	Lord	here	summarizes	the	total	influence	of	the	three	modes	of	material
nature	all	over	the	universe.
TEXT	41
ब ् र ा ቊ ण ᇤ ि त ् र य ि व श ा ं
	
श ू द ् र ा ण ा ं
	
च
	
प र ᇳ त प
	
।
क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
प ् र ि व भ ᇧ त ा ि न
	
ᇿ व भ ा व प ् र भ व ै ग ु ᆼ ण ै ः
	
॥
४ १
॥
brāhmaṇa-kṣatriya-viśāṁ
śūdrāṇāṁ	ca	parantapa
karmāṇi	pravibhaktāni
svabhāva-prabhavair	guṇaiḥ
brāhmaṇa
—the	
brāhmaṇas
;	
kṣatriya
—the	
kṣatriyas
;	
viśām
—the	v
aiśyas
;
śūdrāṇām
—the	
śūdras
;	
ca
—and;	
parantapa
—O	subduer	of	the	enemies;
karmāṇi
—activities;	
pravibhaktāni
—are	divided;	
svabhāva
—own	nature;
prabhavaiḥ
—born	of;	
guṇaiḥ
—by	the	modes	of	material	nature.
TRANSLATION
Brāhmaṇas,	kṣatriyas,	vaiśyas	and	śūdras	are	distinguished	by	their
qualities	of	work,	O	chastiser	of	the	enemy,	in	accordance	with	the	modes
of	nature.
TEXT	42
श म ो
	
द म ᇿ त प ः
	
श ौ च ं
	
ᇤ ा ि ᇳ त र ा ज ᆼ व म े व
	
च
	
।
ᇥ ा न ं
	
ि व ᇥ ा न म ा ि ᇿ त ᇧ य ं
	
ब ् र ቊ क म ᆼ
	
ᇿ व भ ा व ज म ्
	
॥
४ २
॥
śamo	damas	tapaḥ	śaucaṁkṣāntir	ārjavam	eva	ca
jñānaṁ	vijñānam	āstikyaṁ
brahma-karma	svabhāva-jam
śamaḥ—
peacefulness;	
damaḥ—
self-control;	
tapaḥ—
austerity;	
śaucam—
purity;	
kṣāntiḥ—
tolerance;	
ārjavam
—honesty;	
eva—
certainly;	
ca—
and;
jñānam—
wisdom;	
vijñānam—
knowledge;	
āstikyam—
religiousness;	
brahma
—
of	a	
brāhmaṇa;	karma—
duty;	
svabhāva-jam—
born	of	his	own	nature.
TRANSLATION
Peacefulness,	self-control,	austerity,	purity,	tolerance,	honesty,	wisdom,
knowledge,	and	religiousness–these	are	the	qualities	by	which	the
brāhmaṇas	work.
TEXT	43
श ौ य ᆾ
	
त े ज ो
	
ध ृ ि त द ा ᆼ ቎ य ं
	
य ु ሬ े
	
च ा ᇴ य प ल ा य न म ्
	
।
द ा न म ी ᇽ व र भ ा व ᇽ च
	
ᇤ ा त ् र ं
	
क म ᆼ
	
ᇿ व भ ा व ज म ्
	
॥
४ ३
॥
śauryaṁ	tejo	dhṛtir	dākṣyaṁ
yuddhe	cāpy	apalāyanam
dānam	īśvara-bhāvaś	ca
kṣātraṁ	karma	svabhāva-jam
śauryam—
heroism;	
tejaḥ
—power;	
dhṛtiḥ—
determination;	
dākṣyam—
resourcefulness;	
yuddhe—
in	battle;	
ca—
and;	
api—
also;	
apalāyanam—
not
fleeing;	
dānam—
generosity;	
īśvara—
leadership;	
bhāvaḥ—
nature;	
ca—
and
kṣātram-kṣatriya;	karma—
duty;	
svabhāva-jam—
born	of	his	own	nature.
TRANSLATION
Heroism,	power,	determination,	resourcefulness,	courage	in	battle,
generosity,	and	leadership	are	the	qualities	of	work	for	the	kṣatriyas.TEXT	44
क ृ ि ष ग ो र ቎ य व ा ि ण ᇬ य ं
	
व ै ᇽ य क म ᆼ
	
ᇿ व भ ा व ज म ्
	
।
प ि र च य ा ᆼ ᇰ म क ं
	
क म ᆼ
	
श ू द ् र ᇿ य ा ि प
	
ᇿ व भ ा व ज म ्
	
॥
४ ४
॥
kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ
vaiśya-karma	svabhāva-jam
paricaryātmakaṁ	karma
śūdrasyāpi	svabhāva-jam
kṛṣi—
ploughing;	
go
—cows;	
rakṣya—
protection;	
vāṇijyam—
trade;	
vaiśya—
vaiśya;	karma—
duty;	
svabhāva-jam—
born	of	his	own	nature;	
paricaryā—
service;	
ātmakam—
nature;	
karma—
duty;	
śūdrasya—
of	the	
śūdra;	api—
also;
svabhāva-jam—
born	of	his	own	nature.
TRANSLATION
Farming,	cattle	raising	and	business	are	the	qualities	of	work	for	the
vaiśyas,	and	for	the	śūdras	there	is	labor	and	service	to	others.
TEXT	45
ᇿ व े
	
ᇿ व े
	
क म ᆼ ᇯ य ि भ र त ः
	
स ं ि स द ् ि ध ं
	
ल भ त े
	
न र ः
	
।
ᇿ व क म ᆼ ि न र त ः
	
ि स द ् ि ध ं
	
य थ ा
	
ि व ᇳ द ि त
	
त ᇫ छ ृ ण ु
	
॥
४ ५
॥
sve	sve	karmaṇy	abhirataḥ
saṁsiddhiṁ	labhate	naraḥ
sva-karma-nirataḥ	siddhiṁ
yathā	vindati	tac	chṛṇu
sve
—own;	
sve
—own;	
karmaṇi
—in	work;	
abhirataḥ
—following;
saṁsiddhim	
—perfection;	
labhate
—achieves;	
naraḥ
—a	man;	
svakarma
—by
his	own	duty;	
nirataḥ
—engaged;	
siddhim
—perfection;	
yathā—
as;	
vindati
—
attains,	
tat—
that;	
śṛṇu
—listen.TRANSLATION
By	following	his	qualities	of	work,	every	man	can	become	perfect.	Now
please	hear	from	Me	how	this	can	be	done.
TEXT	46
य त ः
	
प ् र व ृ ि ሧ भ ू ᆼ त ा न ा ं
	
य े न
	
स व ᆼ ि म द ं
	
त त म ्
	
।
ᇿ व क म ᆼ ण ा
	
त म ᇷ य ᇫ य ᆼ
	
ि स द ् ि ध ं
	
ि व ᇳ द ि त
	
म ा न व ः
	
॥
४ ६
॥
yataḥ	pravṛttir	bhūtānāṁ
yena	sarvam	idaṁ	tatam
sva-karmaṇā	tam	abhyarcya
siddhiṁ	vindati	mānavaḥ
yataḥ—
from	whom;	
pravṛttiḥ—
emanation;	
bhūtānām—
of	all	living	entities;
yena—
by	whom;	
sarvam—
all;
	idam—
this;	
tatam—
is	pervaded;	
svakarmaṇā
—
in	his	own	duties;	
tam—
Him;	
abhyarcya—
by	worshiping;	
siddhim
—
perfection;	
vindati—
achieves;	
mānavaḥ—
a	man.
TRANSLATION
By	worship	of	the	Lord,	who	is	the	source	of	all	beings	and	who	is	all-
pervading,	man	can,	in	the	performance	of	his	own	duty,	attain
perfection.
PURPORT
As	stated	in	the	Fifteenth	Chapter,	all	living	beings	are	fragmental	parts	and
parcels	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	As	such,	the	Supreme	Lord	is	the	beginning	of
all	living	entities.	This	is	confirmed	in	the	
Vedānta-sūtra—	janmādy	asya
yataḥ.	
The	Supreme	Lord	is	therefore	the	beginning	of	life	of	every	living
entity.	And	the	Supreme	Lord,	by	His	two	energies,	His	external	energy	and
internal	energy,	is	all-pervading.	Therefore	one	should	worship	the	Supreme
Lord	with	His	energies.	Generally	the	Vaiṣṇava	devotees	worship	the	SupremeLord	with	His	internal	energy.	His	external	energy	is	a	perverted	reflection	of
the	internal	energy.	The	external	energy	is	a	background,	but	the	Supreme
Lord	by	the	expansion	of	His	plenary	portion	as	Paramātmā	is	situated
everywhere.	He	is	the	Supersoul	of	all	demigods,	all	human	beings,	all
animals,	everywhere.	One	should	therefore	know	that	as	part	and	parcel	of	the
Supreme	Lord	it	is	his	duty	to	render	service	unto	the	Supreme.	Everyone
should	be	engaged	in	devotional	service	to	the	Lord	in	full	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	That	is	recommended	in	this	verse.
Everyone	should	think	that	he	is	engaged	in	a	particular	type	of	occupation
by	Hṛṣīkeśa,	the	master	of	the	senses.	And,	by	the	result	of	the	work	in	which
one	is	engaged,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa,	should	be
worshiped.	If	one	thinks	always	in	this	way,	in	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	then,
by	the	grace	of	the	Lord,	he	becomes	fully	aware	of	everything.	That	is	the
perfection	of	life.	The	Lord	says	in	
Bhagavad-gītā,	teṣām	ahaṁ	samuddhartā.
The	Supreme	Lord	Himself	takes	charge	of	delivering	such	a	devotee.	That	is
the	highest	perfection	of	life.	In	whatever	occupation	one	may	be	engaged,	if
he	serves	the	Supreme	Lord,	he	will	achieve	the	highest	perfection.
TEXT	47
श ् र े य ा ᇳ ᇿ व ध म ो ᆼ
	
ि व ग ु ण ः
	
प र ध म ा ᆼ ᇰ ᇿ व न ु ि ᇾ ठ त ा त ्
	
।
ᇿ व भ ा व ि न य त ं
	
क म ᆼ
	
क ु व ᆼ ᇳ न ा ᇴ न ो ि त
	
ि क ि ᇺ ब ष म ्
	
॥
४ ७
॥
śreyān	sva-dharmo	viguṇaḥ
para-dharmāt	sv-anuṣṭhitāt
svabhāva-niyataṁ	karma
kurvan	nāpnoti	kilbiṣam
sreyān—
better;	
sva-dharmaḥ—
one's	own	occupation;	
viguṇaḥ—
imperfectly
performed;	
para-dharmāt—
another's	occupation;	
svanuṣṭhitāt—	
perfectly
done;	
svabhāva-niyatam—
prescribed	duties	according	to	one's	nature;	
karma
—
work;	
kurvan—
performing;	
na—
never;	
āpnoti—
achieve;	
kilbiṣam—
sinful
reactions.
TRANSLATION
It	is	better	to	engage	in	one's	own	occupation,	even	though	one	mayperform	it	imperfectly,	than	to	accept	another's	occupation	and	perform
it	perfectly.	Prescribed	duties,	according	to	one's	nature,	are	never
affected	by	sinful	reactions.
PURPORT
One's	occupational	duty	is	prescribed	in	
Bhagavad-gītā.
	As	already
discussed	in	previous	verses,	the	duties	of	a	
brāhmaṇa,	kṣatriya,	vaiśya	
and
śūdra	
are	prescribed	according	to	the	particular	modes	of	nature.	One	should
not	imitate	another's	duty.	A	man	who	is	by	nature	attracted	to	the	kind	of
work	done	by	
śūdras	
should	not	artificially	claim	himself	to	be	a	
brāhmaṇa,
although	he	may	be	born	into	a	
brāhmaṇa	
family.	In	this	way	one	should	work
according	to	his	own	nature;	no	work	is	abominable,	if	performed	in	the
service	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	The	occupational	duty	of	a	
brāhmaṇa	
is
certainly	in	the	mode	of	goodness,	but	if	a	person	is	not	by	nature	in	the	mode
of	goodness,	he	should	not	imitate	the	occupational	duty	of	a	
brāhmaṇa.	
For	a
kṣatriya,	
or	administrator,	there	are	so	many	abominable	things;	a	
kṣatriya	
has
to	be	violent	to	kill	his	enemies,	and	sometimes	a	
kṣatriya	
has	to	tell	lies	for
the	sake	of	diplomacy.	Such	violence	and	duplicity	accompany	political
affairs,	but	a	
kṣatriya
	is	not	supposed	to	give	up	his	occupational	duty	and	try
to	perform	the	duties	of	a	
brāhmaṇa.
One	should	act	to	satisfy	the	Supreme	Lord.	For	example,	Arjuna	was	a
kṣatriya.	
He	was	hesitating	to	fight	the	other	party.	But	if	such	fighting	is
performed	for	the	sake	of	Kṛṣṇa,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	there
need	be	no	fear	of	degradation.	In	the	business	field	also,	sometimes	a
merchant	has	to	tell	so	many	lies	to	make	a	profit.	If	he	does	not	do	so,	there
can	be	no	profit.	Sometimes	a	merchant	says,	"Oh,	my	dear	customer,	for	you
I	am	making	no	profit,"	but	one	should	know	that	without	profit	the	merchant
cannot	exist.	Therefore	it	should	be	taken	as	a	simple	lie	if	a	merchant	says
that	he	is	not	making	a	profit.	But	the	merchant	should	not	think	that	because
he	is	engaged	in	an	occupation	in	which	the	telling	of	lies	is	compulsory,	he
should	give	up	his	profession	and	pursue	the	profession	of	a	
brāhmaṇa.	
That
is	not	recommended.	Whether	one	is	a	
kṣatriya,	
a	
vaiśya,	
or	a	
śūdra	
doesn't
matter,	if	he	serves,	by	his	work,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Even
brāhmaṇas,	
who	perform	different	types	of	sacrifice,	sometimes	must	kill
animals	because	sometimes	animals	are	sacrificed	in	such	ceremonies.
Similarly,	if	a	
kṣatriya	
engaged	in	his	own	occupation	kills	an	enemy,	there	isno	sin	incurred.	In	the	Third	Chapter	these	matters	have	been	clearly	and
elaborately	explained;	every	man	should	work	for	the	purpose	of	
yajña,	
or	for
Viṣṇu,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Anything	done	for	personal	sense
gratification	is	a	cause	of	bondage.	The	conclusion	is	that	everyone	should	be
engaged	according	to	the	particular	mode	of	nature	he	has	acquired,	and	he
should	decide	to	work	only	to	serve	the	supreme	cause	of	the	Supreme	Lord.
TEXT	48
स ह ज ं
	
क म ᆼ
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
स द ो ष म ि प
	
न
	
ᇰ य ज े त ्
	
।
स व ा ᆼ र ᇸ भ ा
	
ि ह
	
द ो ष े ण
	
ध ू म े न ा ि ᇩ न ि र व ा व ृ त ा ः
	
॥
४ ८
॥
saha-jaṁ	karma	kaunteya
sa-doṣam	api	na	tyajet
sarvārambhā	hi	doṣeṇa
dhūmenāgnir	ivāvṛtāḥ
saha-jam—
born	simultaneously;	
karma—
work;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of	Kuntī;
sa-doṣam—
with	fault;	
api—
although;	
na—
never;	
tyajet—
to	be	given	up;
sarva-ārambhāḥ—
any	venture;	
hi—
is	certainly;	
doṣeṇa—
with	fault;	
dhūmena
—
with	smoke;	
agniḥ—
fire;	
iva—
as;	
āvṛtāḥ—
covered.
TRANSLATION
Every	endeavor	is	covered	by	some	sort	of	fault,	just	as	fire	is	covered
by	smoke.	Therefore	one	should	not	give	up	the	work	which	is	born	of	his
nature,	O	son	of	Kuntī,	even	if	such	work	is	full	of	fault.
PURPORT
In	conditioned	life,	all	work	is	contaminated	by	the	material	modes	of
nature.	Even	if	one	is	a	
brāhmaṇa,	
he	has	to	perform	sacrifices	in	which
animal	killing	is	necessary.	Similarly,	a	
kṣatriya,	
however	pious	he	may	be,
has	to	fight	enemies.	He	cannot	avoid	it.	Similarly,	a	merchant,	however	pious
he	may	be,	must	sometimes	hide	his	profit	to	stay	in	business,	or	he	may
sometimes	have	to	do	business	on	the	black	market.	These	things	arenecessary;	one	cannot	avoid	them.	Similarly,	even	though	a	man	is	a	
śūdra
serving	a	bad	master,	he	has	to	carry	out	the	order	of	the	master,	even	though
it	should	not	be	done.	Despite	these	flaws,	one	should	continue	to	carry	out	his
prescribed	duties,	for	they	are	born	out	of	his	own	nature.
A	very	nice	example	is	given	herein.	Although	fire	is	pure,	still	there	is
smoke.	Yet	smoke	does	not	make	the	fire	impure.	Even	though	there	is	smoke
in	the	fire,	fire	is	still	considered	to	be	the	purest	of	all	elements.	If	one	prefers
to	give	up	the	work	of	a	
kṣatriya	
and	take	up	the	occupation	of	a	
brāhmaṇa,
he	is	not	assured	that	in	the	occupation	of	a	
brāhmaṇa	
there	are	no	unpleasant
duties.	One	may	then	conclude	that	in	the	material	world	no	one	can	be
completely	free	from	the	contamination	of	material	nature.	This	example	of
fire	and	smoke	is	very	appropriate	in	this	connection.	When	in	wintertime	one
takes	a	stone	from	the	fire,	sometimes	smoke	disturbs	the	eyes	and	other	parts
of	the	body,	but	still	one	must	make	use	of	the	fire	despite	disturbing
conditions.	Similarly,	one	should	not	give	up	his	natural	occupation	because
there	are	some	disturbing	elements.	Rather,	one	should	be	determined	to	serve
the	Supreme	Lord	by	his	occupational	duty	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	That	is
the	perfectional	point.	When	a	particular	type	of	occupation	is	performed	for
the	satisfaction	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	all	the	defects	in	that	particular
occupation	are	purified.	When	the	results	of	work	are	purified,	when
connected	with	devotional	service,	one	becomes	perfect	in	seeing	the	self
within,	and	that	is	self-realization.
TEXT	49
अ स ᇧ त ब ु द ् ि ध ः
	
स व ᆼ त ् र
	
ि ज त ा ᇰ म ा
	
ि व ग त ᇿ प ृ ह ः
	
।
न ै ᇾ क ᇸ य ᆼ ि स द ् ि ध ं
	
प र म ा ं
	
स ं ᇳ य ा स े न ा ि ध ग ᇫ छ ि त
	
॥
४ ९
॥
asakta-buddhiḥ	sarvatra
jitātmā	vigata-spṛhaḥ
naiṣkarmya-siddhiṁ	paramāṁ
sannyāsenādhigacchati
asakta-buddhiḥ—
unattached	intelligence;	
sarvatra
—everywhere;	
jita-ātmā
—
control	of	the	mind,	
vigata-spṛhaḥ—
without	material	desires;	
naiṣkarmya-
siddhim—
perfection	of	non-reaction;	
paramām
—supreme;	
sannyāsena
—by
the	renounced	order	of	life;	
adhigacchati—
attains.TRANSLATION
One	can	obtain	the	results	of	renunciation	simply	by	self-control	and	by
becoming	unattached	to	material	things	and	disregarding	material
enjoyments.	That	is	the	highest	perfectional	stage	of	renunciation.
PURPORT
Real	renunciation	means	that	one	should	always	think	himself	part	and
parcel	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	Therefore	he	has	no	right	to	enjoy	the	results	of
his	work.	Since	he	is	part	and	parcel	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	the	results	of	his
work	must	be	enjoyed	by	the	Supreme	Lord.	This	is	actually	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.	The	person	acting	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	really	a	
sannyāsī
,
one	in	the	renounced	order	of	life.	By	such	mentality,	one	is	satisfied	because
he	is	actually	acting	for	the	Supreme.	Thus	he	is	not	attached	to	anything
material;	he	becomes	accustomed	to	not	taking	pleasure	in	anything	beyond
the	transcendental	happiness	derived	from	the	service	of	the	Lord.	A	
sannyāsī
is	supposed	to	be	free	from	the	reactions	of	his	past	activities,	but	a	person
who	is	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	automatically	attains	this	perfection	without
even	accepting	the	so-called	order	of	renunciation.	This	state	of	mind	is	called
yogārūḍha,	
or	the	perfectional	stage	of	
yoga,	
as	confirmed	in	the	Third
Chapter:	
yas	tv	ātma-ratir	eva	syāt.	
One	who	is	satisfied	in	himself	has	no	fear
of	any	kind	of	reaction	from	his	activity.
TEXT	50
ि स द ् ि ध ं
	
प ् र ा ᇴ त ो
	
य थ ा
	
ब ् र ቊ
	
त थ ा ᇴ न ो ि त
	
ि न ब ो ध
	
म े
	
।
स म ा स े न ै व
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
ि न ᇾ ठ ा
	
ᇥ ा न ᇿ य
	
य ा
	
प र ा
	
॥
५ ०
॥
siddhiṁ	prāpto	yathā	brahma
tathāpnoti	nibodha	me
samāsenaiva	kaunteya
niṣṭhā	jñānasya	yā	parā
siddhim—
perfection;	
prāptaḥ—
achieving;	
yathā—
as;	
brahma—
the
Supreme;	
tathā—
so;
	āpnoti—
achieves;	
nibodha—
try	to	understand;	
me—from	Me;	
samāsena—
summarily;	
eva—
certainly;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of	Kuntī;
niṣṭhā—
stage;	
jñānasya—
of	knowledge;	
yā
—which;	
parā
—transcendental.
TRANSLATION
O	son	of	Kuntī,	learn	from	Me	in	brief	how	one	can	attain	to	the
supreme	perfectional	stage,	Brahman,	by	acting	in	the	way	which	I	shall
now	summarize.
PURPORT
The	Lord	describes	for	Arjuna	how	one	can	achieve	the	highest	perfectional
stage	simply	by	being	engaged	in	his	occupational	duty,	performing	that	duty
for	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	One	attains	the	supreme	stage	of
Brahman	simply	by	renouncing	the	result	of	his	work	for	the	satisfaction	of
the	Supreme	Lord.	That	is	the	process	of	self-realization.	Actual	perfection	of
knowledge	is	in	attaining	pure	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness;	that	is	described	in	the
following	verses.
TEXTS	51-53
ब ु ሬ ᆸ ा
	
ि व श ु ሬ य ा
	
य ु ᇧ त ो
	
ध ृ ᇰ य ा ᇰ म ा न ं
	
ि न य ᇸ य
	
च
	
।
श ᇶ द ा द ी ि ᇳ व ष य ा ं ᇿ ᇰ य ᇧ ᇰ व ा
	
र ा ग ሲ े ष ौ
	
ᇼ य ु द ᇿ य
	
च
	
॥
५ १
॥
ि व ि व ᇧ त स े व ी
	
ल ᇪ व ा श ी
	
य त व ा ᇧ क ा य म ा न स ः
	
।
ᇲ य ा न य ो ग प र ो
	
ि न ᇰ य ं
	
व ैर ा ᇩ य ं
	
स म ु प ा ि श ् र त ः
	
॥
५ २
॥
अ ह ं क ा र ं
	
ब ल ं
	
द प ᆾ
	
क ा म ं
	
क ् र ो ध ं
	
प ि र ग ् र ह म ्
	
।
ि व म ु ᇫ य
	
ि न म ᆼ म ः
	
श ा ᇳ त ो
	
ब ् र ቊ भ ू य ा य
	
क ᇺ प त े
	
॥
५ ३
॥
buddhyā	viśuddhayā	yukto
dhṛtyātmānaṁ	niyamya	ca
śabdādīn	viṣayāṁs	tyaktvā
rāga-dveṣau	vyudasya	ca
vivikta-sevī	laghv-āśī
yata-vāk-kāya-mānasaḥ
dhyāna-yoga-paro	nityaṁ
vairāgyaṁ	samupāśritaḥahaṅkāraṁ	balaṁ	darpaṁ
kāmaṁ	krodhaṁ	parigraham
vimucya	nirmamaḥ	śānto
brahma-bhūyāya	kalpate
buddhyā—
by	the	intelligence;	
viśuddhayā—
fully	purified;	
yuktaḥ—
such
engagement;	
dhṛtyā—
determination;	
ātmānam—
self;	
niyamya—
regulated;	
ca
—
also;	
śabdādīn—
the	sense	objects,	such	as	sound,	etc.;	
viṣayān—
sense
objects;	
tyaktvā—
giving	up;	
rāga
—attachments;	
dveṣau—
hatred;
	vyudasya—
having	laid	aside;	
ca—
also;	
vivikta-sevī—
living	in	a	secluded	place;	
laghu-āśī
—eating	a	small	quantity;	
yata-vāk
—control	of	speech;	
kāya—	
body;
mānasaḥ—
control	of	the	mind;	
dhyāna-yoga-paraḥ—
always	absorbed	in
trance;	
nityam—
twenty-four	hours	a	day;	
vairāgyam—
detachment;
samupāśritaḥ—
taken	shelter	of;
	ahaṅkāram—
false	ego;
	balam—	
false
strength;	
darpam—
false	pride;	
kāmam—
lust;
	krodham—
anger;	
parigraham
—
acceptance	of	material	things;	
vimucya—
being	delivered;	
nirmamaḥ
—
without	proprietorship;	
śāntaḥ
—peaceful;	
brahma-bhūyāya
—to	become	self-
realized;	
kalpate—
is	understood.
TRANSLATION
Being	purified	by	his	intelligence	and	controlling	the	mind	with
determination,	giving	up	the	objects	of	sense	gratification,	being	freed
from	attachment	and	hatred,	one	who	lives	in	a	secluded	place,	who	eats
little	and	who	controls	the	body	and	the	tongue,	and	is	always	in	trance
and	is	detached,	who	is	without	false	ego,	false	strength,	false	pride,	lust,
anger,	and	who	does	not	accept	material	things,	such	a	person	is	certainly
elevated	to	the	position	of	self-realization.
PURPORT
When	one	is	purified	by	knowledge,	he	keeps	himself	in	the	mode	of
goodness.	Thus	one	becomes	the	controller	of	the	mind	and	is	always	in
trance.	Because	he	is	not	attached	to	the	objects	of	sense	gratification,	he	does
not	eat	more	than	what	he	requires,	and	he	controls	the	activities	of	his	body
and	mind.	He	has	no	false	ego	because	he	does	not	accept	the	body	as	himself.
Nor	has	he	a	desire	to	make	the	body	fat	and	strong	by	accepting	so	manymaterial	things.	Because	he	has	no	bodily	concept	of	life,	he	is	not	falsely
proud.	He	is	satisfied	with	everything	that	is	offered	to	him	by	the	grace	of	the
Lord,	and	he	is	never	angry	in	the	absence	of	sense	gratification.	Nor	does	he
endeavor	to	acquire	sense	objects.	Thus	when	he	is	completely	free	from	false
ego,	he	becomes	nonattached	to	all	material	things,	and	that	is	the	stage	of
self-realization	of	Brahman.	That	stage	is	called	the	
brahma-bhūta	
stage.
When	one	is	free	from	the	material	conception	of	life,	he	becomes	peaceful
and	cannot	be	agitated.
TEXT	54
ब ् र ቊ भ ू त ः
	
प ् र स ᇳ न ा ᇰ म ा
	
न
	
श ो च ि त
	
न
	
क ा ङ ् ᇤ ि त
	
।
स म ः
	
स व ᆹ ष ु
	
भ ू त े ष ु
	
म द ् भ ि ᇧ त ं
	
ल भ त े
	
प र ा म ्
	
॥
५ ४
॥
brahma-bhūtaḥ	prasannātmā
na	śocati	na	kāṅkṣati
samaḥ	sarveṣu	bhūteṣu
mad-bhaktiṁ	labhate	parām
brahma-bhūtaḥ—
being	one	with	the	Absolute;	
prasanna-ātmā—
fully
joyful;	
na—
never;	
śocati—
laments;	
na—
never;	
kāṅkṣati—
desires;	
samaḥ—
equally	disposed;	
sarveṣu—
all;	
bhūteṣu—
living	entity;	
mat-bhaktim—
My
devotional	service;	
labhate—
gains;	
parām—
transcendental.
TRANSLATION
One	who	is	thus	transcendentally	situated	at	once	realizes	the	Supreme
Brahman.	He	never	laments	nor	desires	to	have	anything;	he	is	equally
disposed	to	every	living	entity.	In	that	state	he	attains	pure	devotional
service	unto	Me.
PURPORT
To	the	impersonalist,	achieving	the	
brahma-bhūta	
stage,	becoming	one	with
the	Absolute,	is	the	last	word.	But	for	the	personalist,	or	pure	devotee,	one	has
to	go	still	further	to	become	engaged	in	pure	devotional	service.	This	meansthat	one	who	is	engaged	in	pure	devotional	service	to	the	Supreme	Lord	is
already	in	a	state	of	liberation,	called	
brahma-bhūta,	
oneness	with	the
Absolute.	Without	being	one	with	the	Supreme,	the	Absolute,	one	cannot
render	service	unto	Him.	In	the	absolute	conception,	there	is	no	difference
between	the	served	and	the	servitor;	yet	the	distinction	is	there,	in	a	higher
spiritual	sense.
In	the	material	concept	of	life,	when	one	works	for	sense	gratification,	there
is	misery,	but	in	the	absolute	world,	when	one	is	engaged	in	pure	devotional
service,	there	is	no	misery.	The	devotee	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	has	nothing	to
lament	or	desire.	Since	God	is	full,	a	living	entity	who	is	engaged	in	God's
service,	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	becomes	also	full	in	himself.	He	is	just	like	a
river	cleansed	of	all	dirty	water.	Because	a	pure	devotee	has	no	thought	other
than	Kṛṣṇa,	he	is	naturally	always	joyful.	He	does	not	lament	for	any	material
loss	or	gain	because	he	is	full	in	service	of	the	Lord.	He	has	no	desire	for
material	enjoyment	because	he	knows	that	every	living	entity	is	the	fragmental
part	and	parcel	of	the	Supreme	Lord	and	therefore	eternally	a	servant.	He	does
not	see,	in	the	material	world,	someone	as	higher	and	someone	as	lower;
higher	and	lower	positions	are	ephemeral,	and	a	devotee	has	nothing	to	do
with	ephemeral	appearances	or	disappearances.	For	him	stone	and	gold	are	of
equal	value.	This	is	the	
brahma-bhūta	
stage,	and	this	stage	is	attained	very
easily	by	the	pure	devotee.	In	that	stage	of	existence,	the	idea	of	becoming	one
with	the	Supreme	Brahman	and	annihilating	one's	individuality	becomes
hellish,	and	the	idea	of	attaining	the	heavenly	kingdom	becomes
phantasmagoria,	and	the	senses	are	like	broken	serpents'	teeth.	As	there	is	no
fear	of	a	serpent	with	broken	teeth,	so	there	is	no	fear	from	the	senses	when
they	are	automatically	controlled.	The	world	is	miserable	for	the	materially
infected	person,	but	for	a	devotee	the	entire	world	is	as	good	as	Vaikuṇṭha,	or
the	spiritual	sky.	The	highest	personality	in	this	material	universe	is	no	more
significant	than	an	ant	for	a	devotee.	Such	a	stage	can	be	achieved	by	the
mercy	of	Lord	Caitanya,	who	preached	pure	devotional	service	in	this	age.
TEXT	55
भ ᇧ ᇰ य ा
	
म ा म ि भ ज ा न ा ि त
	
य ा व ा ᇳ य ᇽ च ा ि ᇿ म
	
त ᇰ ᇰ व त ः
	
।
त त ो
	
म ा ं
	
त ᇰ ᇰ व त ो
	
ᇥ ा ᇰ व ा
	
ि व श त े
	
त द न ᇳ त र म ्
	
॥
५ ५
॥
bhaktyā	mām	abhijānāti
yāvān	yaś	cāsmi	tattvataḥtato	māṁ	tattvato	jñātvā
viśate	tad-anantaram
bhaktyā—
by	pure	devotional	service;	
mām—
Me;	
abhijānāti—
one	can
know;	
yāvān—
as	much	as;	
yaḥ	ca	asmi—
as	I	am;	
tattvataḥ—
in	truth;	
tataḥ
—
thereafter;	
mām—
Me;	
tattvataḥ—
by	truth;	
jñātvā—
knowing;	
viśate—
enters;	
tat—
thereafter;	
anantaram—
after.
TRANSLATION
One	can	understand	the	Supreme	Personality	as	He	is	only	by
devotional	service.	And	when	one	is	in	full	consciousness	of	the	Supreme
Lord	by	such	devotion,	he	can	enter	into	the	kingdom	of	God.
PURPORT
The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa,	and	His	plenary	portions
cannot	be	understood	by	mental	speculation	nor	by	the	nondevotees.	If	anyone
wants	to	understand	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	he	has	to	take	to
pure	devotional	service	under	the	guidance	of	a	pure	devotee.	Otherwise,	the
truth	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	will	always	be	hidden.	It	is
already	stated	
(nāhaṁ	prakāśaḥ)	
that	He	is	not	revealed	to	everyone.
Everyone	cannot	understand	God	simply	by	erudite	scholarship	or	mental
speculation.	Only	one	who	is	actually	engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	and
devotional	service	can	understand	what	Kṛṣṇa	is.	University	degrees	are	not
helpful.
One	who	is	fully	conversant	with	the	Kṛṣṇa	science	becomes	eligible	to
enter	into	the	spiritual	kingdom,	the	abode	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Becoming	Brahman	does
not	mean	that	one	loses	his	identity.	Devotional	service	is	there,	and	as	long	as
devotional	service	exists,	there	must	be	God,	the	devotee,	and	the	process	of
devotional	service.	Such	knowledge	is	never	vanquished,	even	after	liberation.
Liberation	involves	getting	free	from	the	concept	of	material	life;	in	spiritual
life	the	same	distinction	is	there,	the	same	individuality	is	there,	but	in	pure
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	One	should	not	misunderstand	that	the	word	
viśate
,
"enters	into	Me,"	supports	the	monist	theory	that	one	becomes	homogeneous
with	the	impersonal	Brahman.	No.	
Viśate
	means	that	one	can	enter	into	the
abode	of	the	Supreme	Lord	in	his	individuality	to	engage	in	His	associationand	render	service	unto	Him.	For	instance,	a	green	bird	enters	a	green	tree	not
to	become	one	with	the	tree	but	to	enjoy	the	fruits	of	the	tree.	Impersonalists
generally	give	the	example	of	a	river	flowing	into	the	ocean	and	merging.	This
may	be	a	source	of	happiness	for	the	impersonalist,	but	the	personalist	keeps
his	personal	individuality	like	an	aquatic	in	the	ocean.	We	find	so	many	living
entities	within	the	ocean,	if	we	go	deep.	Surface	acquaintance	with	the	ocean
is	not	sufficient;	one	must	have	complete	knowledge	of	the	aquatics	living	in
the	ocean	depths.
Because	of	his	pure	devotional	service,	a	devotee	can	understand	the
transcendental	qualities	and	the	opulences	of	the	Supreme	Lord	in	truth.	As	it
is	stated	in	the	Eleventh	Chapter,	only	by	devotional	service	can	one
understand.	The	same	is	confirmed	here;	one	can	understand	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead	by	devotional	service	and	enter	into	His	kingdom.
After	attainment	of	the	
brahma-bhūta	
stage	of	freedom	from	material
conceptions,	devotional	service	begins	by	one's	hearing	about	the	Lord.	When
one	hears	about	the	Supreme	Lord,	automatically	the	
brahma-bhūta	
stage
develops,	and	material	contamination–greediness	and	lust	for	sense
enjoyment–disappears.	As	lust	and	desires	disappear	from	the	heart	of	a
devotee,	he	becomes	more	attached	to	the	service	of	the	Lord,	and	by	such
attachment	he	becomes	free	from	material	contamination.	In	that	state	of	life
he	can	understand	the	Supreme	Lord.	This	is	the	statement	of	
Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam	
also.	Also	after	liberation	the	process	of	
bhakti	
or	transcendental
service	continues.	The	
Vedānta-sūtra	
confirms	this:	
āprāyaṇāt	tatrāpi	hi
dṛṣṭam.	
This	means	that	after	liberation	the	process	of	devotional	service
continues.	In	the	
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,	
real	devotional	liberation	is	defined	as
the	reinstatement	of	the	living	entity	in	his	own	identity,	his	own	constitutional
position.	The	constitutional	position	is	already	explained:	every	living	entity	is
the	part	and	parcel	fragmental	portion	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	Therefore	his
constitutional	position	is	to	serve.	After	liberation,	this	service	is	never
stopped.	Actual	liberation	is	getting	free	from	misconceptions	of	life.
TEXT	56
स व ᆼ क म ा ᆼ ᇯ य ि प
	
स द ा
	
क ु व ा ᆼ ण ो
	
म ሲ ᆸ प ा श ् र य ः
	
।
म ᇰ प ् र स ा द ा द व ा ᇴ न ो ि त
	
श ा ᇽ व त ं
	
प द म ᇼ य य म ्
	
॥
५ ६
॥
sarva-karmāṇy	api	sadākurvāṇo	mad-vyapāśrayaḥ
mat-prasādād	avāpnoti
śāśvataṁ	padam	avyayam
sarva—
all;	
karmāṇi—
activities;	
api—
although;	
sadā
—always;	
kurvāṇaḥ—
performing;	
mat—
under	My;	
vyapāśrayah—
protection;	
mat—
My;	
prasādāt
—
mercy;	
avāpnoti—
achieves;	
sāśvatam—
eternal;	
padam—
abode;	
avyayam—
—imperishable.
TRANSLATION
Though	engaged	in	all	kinds	of	activities,	My	devotee,	under	My
protection,	reaches	the	eternal	and	imperishable	abode	by	My	grace.
PURPORT
The	word	
mad-vyapāśrayaḥ	
means	under	the	protection	of	the	Supreme
Lord.	To	be	free	from	material	contamination,	a	pure	devotee	acts	under	the
direction	of	the	Supreme	Lord	or	His	representative,	the	spiritual	master.
There	is	no	time	limitation	for	a	pure	devotee.	He	is	always,	twenty-four
hours,	one	hundred	percent	engaged	in	activities	under	the	direction	of	the
Supreme	Lord.	To	a	devotee	who	is	thus	engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	the
Lord	is	very,	very	kind.	In	spite	of	all	difficulties,	he	is	eventually	placed	in
the	transcendental	abode,	or	Kṛṣṇaloka.	He	is	guaranteed	entrance	there;	there
is	no	doubt	about	it.	In	that	supreme	abode,	there	is	no	change;	everything	is
eternal,	imperishable	and	full	of	knowledge.
TEXT	57
च े त स ा
	
स व ᆼ क म ा ᆼ ि ण
	
म ि य
	
स ं ᇳ य ᇿ य
	
म ᇰ प र ः
	
।
ब ु द ् ि ध य ो ग म प ा ि श ् र ᇰ य
	
म ि ᇫ च ሧ ः
	
स त त ं
	
भ व
	
॥
५ ७
॥
cetasā	sarva-karmāṇi
mayi	sannyasya	mat-paraḥ
buddhi-yogam	upāśritya
mac-cittaḥ	satataṁ	bhavacetasā—
by	intelligence;	
sarva-karmāni—
all	kinds	of	activities;	
mayi—
unto
Me;	
sannyasya—
giving	up;	
mat-paraḥ—
My	protection;	
buddhi-yogam—
devotional	activities;	
upāśritya—
taking	shelter	of;	
mat-cittaḥ—
consciousness;
satatam—
twenty-four	hours	a	day;	
bhava—
just	become.
TRANSLATION
In	all	activities	just	depend	upon	Me	and	work	always	under	My
protection.	In	such	devotional	service,	be	fully	conscious	of	Me.
PURPORT
When	one	acts	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	he	does	not	act	as	the	master	of	the
world.	Just	like	a	servant,	one	should	act	fully	under	the	direction	of	the
Supreme	Lord.	A	servant	has	no	individual	independence.	He	acts	only	on	the
order	of	the	master.	A	servant	acting	on	behalf	of	the	supreme	master	has	no
affection	for	profit	and	loss.	He	simply	discharges	his	duty	faithfully	in	terms
of	the	order	of	the	Lord.	Now,	one	may	argue	that	Arjuna	was	acting	under	the
personal	direction	of	Kṛṣṇa,	but,	when	Kṛṣṇa	is	not	present,	how	should	one
act?	If	one	acts	according	to	the	direction	of	Kṛṣṇa	in	this	book,	as	well	as
under	the	guidance	of	the	representative	of	Kṛṣṇa,	then	the	result	will	be	the
same.	The	Sanskrit	word	
mat-paraḥ
	is	very	important	in	this	verse.	It	indicates
that	one	has	no	goal	in	life	save	and	except	acting	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	just
to	satisfy	Kṛṣṇa.	And,	while	working	in	that	way,	one	should	think	of	Kṛṣṇa
only:	"I	have	been	appointed	to	discharge	this	particular	duty	by	Kṛṣṇa."
While	acting	in	such	a	way,	one	naturally	has	to	think	of	Kṛṣṇa.	This	is	perfect
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	One	should,	however,	note	that,	after	doing	something
whimsically,	he	should	not	offer	the	result	to	the	Supreme	Lord.	That	sort	of
duty	is	not	in	the	devotional	service	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	One	should	act
according	to	the	order	of	Kṛṣṇa	.	This	is	a	very	important	point.	That	order	of
Kṛṣṇa	comes	through	disciplic	succession	from	the	bona	fide	spiritual	master.
Therefore	the	spiritual	master's	order	should	be	taken	as	the	prime	duty	of	life.
If	one	gets	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master	and	acts	according	to	his	direction,	then
his	perfection	of	life	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	guaranteed.
TEXT	58म ि ᇫ च ሧ ः
	
स व ᆼद ु ग ा ᆼ ि ण
	
म ᇰ प ् र स ा द ा ሧ ि र ᇾ य ि स
	
।
अ थ
	
च े ᇰ ᇰ व म ह ं क ा र ा ᇳ न
	
श ् र ो ᇾ य ि स
	
ि व न ङ ् ቎ य ि स
	
॥
५ ८
॥
mac-cittaḥ	sarva-durgāṇi
mat-prasādāt	tariṣyasi
atha	cet	tvam	ahaṅkārān
na	śroṣyasi	vinaṅkṣyasi
mat—
My;	
cittaḥ—
consciousness;	
sarva—
all;	
durgāṇi—
impediments;	
mat—
My;	
prasādāt—
My	mercy;	
tariṣyasi—
you	will	overcome;	
atha—
therefore;	
cet
—
if;	
tvam—
you;
	ahaṅkārāt—
by	false	ego;	
na
—not;	
śroṣyasi
—do	not	hear;
vinaṅkṣyasi
—then	lose	yourself.
TRANSLATION
If	you	become	conscious	of	Me,	you	will	pass	over	all	the	obstacles	of
conditional	life	by	My	grace.	If,	however,	you	do	not	work	in	such
consciousness	but	act	through	false	ego,	not	hearing	Me,	you	will	be	lost.
PURPORT
A	person	in	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	not	unduly	anxious	to	execute	the
duties	of	his	existence.	The	foolish	cannot	understand	this	great	freedom	from
all	anxiety.	For	one	who	acts	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	becomes	the
most	intimate	friend.	He	always	looks	after	His	friend's	comfort,	and	He	gives
Himself	to	His	friend,	who	is	so	devotedly	engaged	working	twenty-four
hours	a	day	to	please	the	Lord.	Therefore,	no	one	should	be	carried	away	by
the	false	ego	of	the	bodily	concept	of	life.	One	should	not	falsely	think	himself
independent	of	the	laws	of	material	nature	or	free	to	act.	He	is	already	under
strict	material	laws.	But,	as	soon	as	he	acts	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	he	is
liberated,	free	from	the	material	perplexities.	One	should	note	very	carefully
that	one	who	is	not	active	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	losing	himself	in	the
material	whirlpool,	in	the	ocean	of	birth	and	death.	No	conditioned	soul
actually	knows	what	is	to	be	done	and	what	is	not	to	be	done,	but	a	person
who	acts	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	free	to	act	because	everything	is	prompted
by	Kṛṣṇa	from	within	and	confirmed	by	the	spiritual	master.TEXT	59
य द ह ं क ा र म ा ि श ् र ᇰ य
	
न
	
य ो ᇰ ᇿ य
	
इ ि त
	
म ᇳ य स े
	
।
ि म ᇱ य ै ष
	
ᇼ य व स ा य ᇿ त े
	
प ् र क ृ ि त ᇿ ᇰ व ा ं
	
ि न य ो ቎ य ि त
	
॥
५ ९
॥
yad	ahaṅkāram	āśritya
na	yotsya	iti	manyase
mithyaiṣa	vyavasāyas	te
prakṛtis	tvāṁ	niyokṣyati
yat—
therefore;	
ahaṅkāram—
false	ego;	
āśritya—
taking	shelter;	
na—
not;
yotsya—
shall	fight;	
iti—
thus;	
manyase—
think;	
mithyā	eṣaḥ—
this	is	all	false;
vyavasāyah	te—
your	determination;	
prakṛtiḥ—
material	nature;	
tvām—	
you;
niyokṣyati—
will	engage	you.
TRANSLATION
If	you	do	not	act	according	to	My	direction	and	do	not	fight,	then	you
will	be	falsely	directed.	By	your	nature,	you	will	have	to	be	engaged	in
warfare.
PURPORT
Arjuna	was	a	military	man,	and	born	of	the	nature	of	the	
kṣatriya.	
Therefore
his	natural	duty	was	to	fight.	But,	due	to	false	ego,	he	was	fearing	that	by
killing	his	teacher,	grandfather	and	friends,	there	would	be	sinful	reactions.
Actually	he	was	considering	himself	master	of	his	actions,	as	if	he	were
directing	the	good	and	bad	results	of	such	work.	He	forgot	that	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead	was	present	there,	instructing	him	to	fight.	That	is	the
forgetfulness	of	the	conditioned	soul.	The	Supreme	Personality	gives
directions	as	to	what	is	good	and	what	is	bad,	and	one	simply	has	to	act	in
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	to	attain	the	perfection	of	life.	No	one	can	ascertain	his
destiny	as	the	Supreme	Lord	can;	therefore	the	best	course	is	to	take	direction
from	the	Supreme	Lord	and	act.	No	one	should	neglect	the	order	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	or	the	order	of	the	spiritual	master	who	is	the
representative	of	God.	One	should	act	unhesitatingly	to	execute	the	order	ofthe	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead—that	will	keep	him	safe	under	all
circumstances.
TEXT	60
ᇿ व भ ा व ज े न
	
क ौ ᇳ त े य
	
ि न ब ሬ ः
	
ᇿ व े न
	
क म ᆼ ण ा
	
।
क त ु ᆾ
	
न े ᇫ छ ि स
	
य ᇳ म ो ह ा ᇰ क ि र ᇾ य ᇿ य व श ो ि प
	
त त ्
	
॥
६ ०
॥
svabhāva-jena	kaunteya
nibaddhaḥ	svena	karmaṇā
kartuṁ	necchasi	yan	mohāt
kariṣyasy	avaśo	'pi	tat
sva-bhāva-jena
—by	one's	own	nature;	
kaunteya
—O	son	of	Kuntī;
nibaddhaḥ
—conditioned;	
svena
—by	one's	own;	
karmaṇā
—activities;	
kartum
—to	do;	
na
—not;	
icchasi
—like;	
yat
—that;	
mohāt
—by	illusion;	
kariṣyasi
—
you	will	act;	
avaśaḥ
—imperceptibly;	
api
—even;	
tat
—that.
TRANSLATION
Under	illusion	you	are	now	declining	to	act	according	to	My	direction.
But,	compelled	by	your	own	nature,	you	will	act	all	the	same,	O	son	of
Kuntī.
PURPORT
If	one	refuses	to	act	under	the	direction	of	the	Supreme	Lord,	then	he	is
compelled	to	act	by	the	modes	in	which	he	is	situated.	Everyone	is	under	the
spell	of	a	particular	combination	of	the	modes	of	nature	and	is	acting	in	that
way.	But	anyone	who	voluntarily	engages	himself	under	the	direction	of	the
Supreme	Lord	becomes	glorious.
TEXT	61
ई ᇽ व र ः
	
स व ᆼ भ ू त ा न ा ं
	
ᇦ ራ े श े ऽ ज ु ᆼ न
	
ि त ᇾ ठ ि त
	
।
भ ् र ा म य ᇳ स व ᆼ भ ू त ा ि न
	
य ᇳ त ् र ा ኅ ढ ा ि न
	
म ा य य ा
	
॥
६ १
॥īśvaraḥ	sarva-bhūtānāṁ
hṛd-deśe	'rjuna	tiṣṭhati
bhrāmayan	sarva-bhūtāni
yantrārūḍhāni	māyayā
īśvaraḥ—
the	Supreme	Lord;	
sarva-bhūtānām—
of	all	living	entities;	
hṛd-
deśe—
in	the	location	of	the	heart;	
arjuna
—O	Arjuna;	
tiṣṭhati—
resides;
bhrāmayan—
causing	to	travel;	
sarva-bhūtāni—
all	living	entities;	
yantra—
machine;	
ārūḍhāni—
being	so	placed;	
māyayā—
under	the	spell	of	material
energy.
TRANSLATION
The	Supreme	Lord	is	situated	in	everyone's	heart,	O	Arjuna,	and	is
directing	the	wanderings	of	all	living	entities,	who	are	seated	as	on	a
machine,	made	of	the	material	energy.
PURPORT
Arjuna	was	not	the	supreme	knower,	and	his	decision	to	fight	or	not	to	fight
was	confined	to	his	limited	discretion.	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	instructed	that	the
individual	is	not	all	in	all.	The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	or	He
Himself,	Kṛṣṇa,	the	localized	Supersoul,	sits	in	the	heart	directing	the	living
being.	After	changing	bodies,	the	living	entity	forgets	his	past	deeds,	but	the
Supersoul,	as	the	knower	of	the	past,	present	and	future,	remains	the	witness
of	all	his	activities.	Therefore	all	the	activities	of	living	entities	are	directed	by
this	Supersoul.	The	living	entity	gets	what	he	deserves	and	is	carried	by	the
material	body	which	is	created	in	the	material	energy	under	the	direction	of
the	Supersoul.	As	soon	as	a	living	entity	is	placed	in	a	particular	type	of	body,
he	has	to	work	under	the	spell	of	that	bodily	situation.	A	person	seated	in	a
high-speed	motor	car	goes	faster	than	one	seated	in	a	slower	car,	though	the
living	entities,	the	drivers,	may	be	the	same.	Similarly,	by	the	order	of	the
Supreme	Soul,	material	nature	fashions	a	particular	type	of	body	to	a
particular	type	of	living	entity	to	work	according	to	his	past	desires.	The	living
entity	is	not	independent.	One	should	not	think	himself	independent	of	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	The	individual	is	always	under	His	control.
Therefore	his	duty	is	to	surrender,	and	that	is	the	injunction	of	the	next	verse.TEXT	62
त म े व
	
श र ण ं
	
ग ᇫ छ
	
स व ᆼ भ ा व े न
	
भ ा र त
	
।
त ᇰ प ् र स ा द ा ᇰ प र ा ं
	
श ा ि ᇳ त ं
	
ᇿ थ ा न ं
	
प ् र ा ᇴ ᇿ य ि स
	
श ा ᇽ व त म ्
	
॥
६ २
॥
tam	eva	śaraṇaṁ	gaccha
sarva-bhāvena	bhārata
tat-prasādāt	parāṁ	śāntiṁ
sthānaṁ	prāpsyasi	śāśvatam
tam—
unto	Him;	
eva—
certainly;	
śaraṇam—
surrender;	
gaccha—
go;	
sarva-
bhāvena—
in	all	respects;	
bhārata
—O	son	of	Bharata;	
tat-prasādāt—
by	His
grace;	
parām—
transcendental;	
śāntim—
peace;	
sthānam—
abode;	
prāpsyasi—
you	will	get;	
śāśvatam—
eternal.
TRANSLATION
O	scion	of	Bharata,	surrender	unto	Him	utterly.	By	His	grace	you	will
attain	transcendental	peace	and	the	supreme	and	eternal	abode.
PURPORT
A	living	entity	should	therefore	surrender	unto	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead	who	is	situated	in	everyone's	heart,	and	that	will	relieve	him	from	all
kinds	of	miseries	of	this	material	existence.	By	such	surrender,	one	will	not
only	be	released	from	all	miseries	in	this	life,	but	at	the	end	he	will	reach	the
Supreme	God.	The	transcendental	world	is	described	in	the	Vedic	literature	as
tad	viṣṇoḥ	paramaṁ	padam.	
Since	all	of	creation	is	the	kingdom	of	God,
everything	material	is	actually	spiritual,	but	
paramaṁ	padam	
specifically
refers	to	the	eternal	abode,	which	is	called	the	spiritual	sky	or	Vaikuṇṭha.
In	the	Fifteenth	Chapter	of	
Bhagavad-gītā	
it	is	stated:	
"Sarvasya	cāham
hṛdi	sanniviṣṭaḥ."	
The	Lord	is	seated	in	everyone's	heart,	so	this
recommendation	that	one	should	surrender	unto	the	Supersoul	sitting	within
means	that	one	should	surrender	unto	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead
,
Kṛṣṇa.	Kṛṣṇa	has	already	been	accepted	by	Arjuna	as	the	Supreme.	He	was
accepted	in	the	Tenth	Chapter	as	
paraṁ	brahma	paraṁ	dhāma.	
Arjuna	hasaccepted	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	and	the	supreme
abode	of	all	living	entities,	not	only	because	of	his	personal	experience	but
also	because	of	the	evidences	of	great	authorities	like	Nārada,	Asita,	Devala
and	Vyāsa.
TEXT	63
इ ि त
	
त े
	
ᇥ ा न म ा ᇨ य ा त ं
	
ग ु ቋ ा द ् ग ु ቋ त र ं
	
म य ा
	
।
ि व म ृ ᇽ य ै त द श े ष े ण
	
य थ े ᇫ छ ि स
	
त थ ा
	
क ु ኄ
	
॥
६ ३
॥
iti	te	jñānam	ākhyātaṁ
guhyād	guhyataraṁ	mayā
vimṛśyaitad	aśeṣeṇa
yathecchasi	tathā	kuru
iti—
thus;	
te—
unto	you;	
jñānam—
knowledge;	
ākhyātam—
described;	
guhyāt
—
confidential;	
guhyataram—
still	more	confidential;	
mayā—
by	Me;	
vimṛśya
—
by	deliberation;	
etat—
that;	
aśeṣeṇa—
fully;	
yathā—
as	you;	
icchasi—
you
like;	
tathā—
that;	
kuru—
perform.
TRANSLATION
Thus	I	have	explained	to	you	the	most	confidential	of	all	knowledge.
Deliberate	on	this	fully,	and	then	do	what	you	wish	to	do.
PURPORT
The	Lord	has	already	explained	to	Arjuna	the	knowledge	of	
brahma-	bhūta
.
One	who	is	in	the	
brahma-bhūta	
condition	is	joyful;	he	never	laments,	nor
does	he	desire	anything.	That	is	due	to	confidential	knowledge.	Kṛṣṇa	also
discloses	knowledge	of	the	Supersoul.	This	is	also	Brahman	knowledge,
knowledge	of	Brahman,	but	it	is	superior.
Here	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	tells	Arjuna	that	he	can	do	as	he	chooses.	God	does	not
interfere	with	the	little	independence	of	the	living	entity.	In	
Bhagavad-gītā,
the	Lord	has	explained	in	all	respects	how	one	can	elevate	his	living
condition.	The	best	advice	imparted	to	Arjuna	is	to	surrender	unto	theSupersoul	seated	within	his	heart.	By	right	discrimination,	one	should	agree	to
act	according	to	the	order	of	the	Supersoul.	That	will	help	one	become
situated	constantly	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	the	highest	perfectional	stage	of
human	life.	Arjuna	is	being	directly	ordered	by	the	Personality	of	Godhead	to
fight.	Surrender	to	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is	in	the	best	interest
of	the	living	entities.	It	is	not	for	the	interest	of	the	Supreme.	Before
surrendering,	one	is	free	to	deliberate	on	this	subject	as	far	as	the	intelligence
goes;	that	is	the	best	way	to	accept	the	instruction	of	the	Supreme	Personality
of	Godhead.	Such	instruction	comes	also	through	the	spiritual	master,	the
bona	fide	representative	of	Kṛṣṇa.
TEXT	64
स व ᆼ ग ु ቋ त म ं
	
भ ू य ः
	
श ृ ण ु
	
म े
	
प र म ं
	
व च ः
	
।
इ ᇾ ट ो ऽ ि स
	
म े
	
द ृ ढ ि म ि त
	
त त ो
	
व ቎ य ा ि म
	
त े
	
ि ह त म ्
	
॥
६ ४
॥
sarva-guhyatamaṁ	bhūyaḥ
śṛṇu	me	paramaṁ	vacaḥ
iṣṭo	'si	me	dṛḍham	iti
tato	vakṣyāmi	te	hitam
sarva-guhyatamam—
the	most	confidential;	
bhūyaḥ—
again;	
śṛṇu
—just
hear;	
me—
from	Me;	
paramam—
the	supreme;	
vacaḥ—
instruction;	
isṭaḥ	asi—
you	are	very	dear	to	Me;
	dṛḍham—
very;	
iti
—thus;	
tataḥ—
therefore;	
vakṣyāmi
—speaking;	
te—
for	your;	
hitam
—benefit.
TRANSLATION
Because	you	are	My	very	dear	friend,	I	am	speaking	to	you	the	most
confidential	part	of	knowledge.	Hear	this	from	Me,	for	it	is	for	your
benefit.
PURPORT
The	Lord	has	given	Arjuna	confidential	knowledge	of	the	Supersoul	within
everyone's	heart,	and	now	He	is	giving	the	most	confidential	part	of	thisknowledge:	just	surrender	unto	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	At	the
end	of	the	Ninth	Chapter	He	has	said,	"Just	always	think	of	Me."	The	same
instruction	is	repeated	here	to	stress	the	essence	of	the	teachings	of	
Bhagavad-
gītā.	
This	essence	is	not	understood	by	a	common	man,	but	by	one	who	is
actually	very	dear	to	Kṛṣṇa,	a	pure	devotee	of	Kṛṣṇa.	This	is	the	most
important	instruction	in	all	Vedic	literature.	What	Kṛṣṇa	is	saying	in	this
connection	is	the	most	essential	part	of	knowledge,	and	it	should	be	carried
out	not	only	by	Arjuna	but	by	all	living	entities.
TEXT	65
म ᇳ म न ा
	
भ व
	
म द ् भ ᇧ त ो
	
म ሱ ा ज ी
	
म ा ं
	
न म ᇿ क ु ኄ
	
।
म ा म े व ै ᇾ य ि स
	
स ᇰ य ं
	
त े
	
प ् र ि त ज ा न े
	
ि प ् र य ो ऽ ि स
	
म े
	
॥
६ ५
॥
man-manā	bhava	mad-bhakto
mad-yājī	māṁ	namaskuru
mām	evaiṣyasi	satyaṁ	te
pratijāne	priyo	'si	me
man-manāḥ
—thinking	of	Me;	
bhava—
just	become;	
mat-bhaktaḥ—
My
devotee;	
mat-yājī
—My	worshiper;	
mām
—unto	Me;	
namaskuru
—offer	your
obeisances;	
mām
—unto	Me;	
eva
—certainly;	
eṣyasi—
come;	
satyam
—truly;	
te
—to	you;	
pratijāne—
I	promise;	
prijaḥ
—dear;	
asi—
you	are;	
me
—My.
TRANSLATION
Always	think	of	Me	and	become	My	devotee.	Worship	Me	and	offer
your	homage	unto	Me.	Thus	you	will	come	to	Me	without	fail.	I	promise
you	this	because	you	are	My	very	dear	friend.
PURPORT
The	most	confidential	part	of	knowledge	is	that	one	should	become	a	pure
devotee	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	always	think	of	Him	and	act	for	Him.	One	should	not
become	an	official	meditator.	Life	should	be	so	molded	that	one	will	always
have	the	chance	to	think	of	Kṛṣṇa.	One	should	always	act	in	such	a	way	thatall	his	daily	activities	are	in	connection	with	Kṛṣṇa.	He	should	arrange	his	life
in	such	a	way	that	throughout	the	twenty-four	hours	he	cannot	but	think	of
Kṛṣṇa.	And	the	Lord's	promise	is	that	anyone	who	is	in	such	pure	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	will	certainly	return	to	the	abode	of	Kṛṣṇa,	where	he	will	be
engaged	in	the	association	of	Kṛṣṇa	face	to	face.	This	most	confidential	part	of
knowledge	is	spoken	to	Arjuna	because	he	is	the	dear	friend	of	Kṛṣṇa.
Everyone	who	follows	the	path	of	Arjuna	can	become	a	dear	friend	to	Kṛṣṇa
and	obtain	the	same	perfection	as	Arjuna.
These	words	stress	that	one	should	concentrate	his	mind	upon	Kṛṣṇa–the
very	form	with	two	hands	carrying	a	flute,	the	bluish	boy	with	a	beautiful	face
and	peacock	feathers	in	His	hair.	There	are	descriptions	of	Kṛṣṇa	found	in	the
Brahma-saṁhitā	
and	other	literatures.	One	should	fix	his	mind	on	this	original
form	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa.	He	should	not	even	divert	his	attention	to	other
forms	of	the	Lord.	The	Lord	has	multi-forms,	as	Viṣṇu,	Nārāyaṇa,	Rāma,
Varāha,	etc.,	but	a	devotee	should	concentrate	his	mind	on	the	form	that	was
present	before	Arjuna.	Concentration	of	the	mind	on	the	form	of	Kṛṣṇa
constitutes	the	most	confidential	part	of	knowledge,	and	this	is	disclosed	to
Arjuna	because	Arjuna	is	the	most	dear	friend	of	Kṛṣṇa's.
TEXT	66
स व ᆼ ध म ा ᆼ ᇳ प ि र ᇰ य ᇬ य
	
म ा म े क ं
	
श र ण ं
	
व ् र ज
	
।
अ ह ं
	
ᇰ व ा
	
स व ᆼ प ा प े ᇷ य ो
	
म ो ᇤ ि य ᇾ य ा ि म
	
म ा
	
श ु च ः
	
॥
६ ६
॥
sarva-dharmān	parityajya
mām	ekaṁ	śaraṇaṁ	vraja
ahaṁ	tvāṁ	sarva-pāpebhyo
mokṣayiṣyāmi	mā	śucaḥ
sarva-dharmān—
all	varieties	of	religion;	
parityajya—
abandoning;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
ekam—
only;	
śaraṇam—
surrender;	
vraja—
go;	
aham—
I;
	tvām—
you;
sarva—
all;	
pāpebhyaḥ—
from	sinful	reactions;	
mokṣayiṣyāmi—
deliver;	
mā—
not;	
śucaḥ—
worry.
TRANSLATION
Abandon	all	varieties	of	religion	and	just	surrender	unto	Me.	I	shalldeliver	you	from	all	sinful	reaction.	Do	not	fear.
PURPORT
The	Lord	has	described	various	kinds	of	knowledge,	processes	of	religion,
knowledge	of	the	Supreme	Brahman,	knowledge	of	the	Supersoul,	knowledge
of	the	different	types	of	orders	and	statuses	of	social	life,	knowledge	of	the
renounced	order	of	life,	knowledge	of	nonattachment,	sense	and	mind	control,
meditation,	etc.	He	has	described	in	so	many	ways	different	types	of	religion.
Now,	in	summarizing	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
the	Lord	says	that	Arjuna	should	give
up	all	the	processes	that	have	been	explained	to	him;	he	should	simply
surrender	to	Kṛṣṇa.	That	surrender	will	save	him	from	all	kinds	of	sinful
reactions,	for	the	Lord	personally	promises	to	protect	him.
In	the	Eighth	Chapter	it	was	said	that	only	one	who	has	become	free	from
all	sinful	reactions	can	take	to	the	worship	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa.	Thus	one	may	think
that	unless	he	is	free	from	all	sinful	reactions	he	cannot	take	to	the
surrendering	process.	To	such	doubts	it	is	here	said	that	even	if	one	is	not	free
from	all	sinful	reactions,	simply	by	the	process	of	surrendering	to	Śrī	Kṛṣṇa	he
is	automatically	freed.	There	is	no	need	of	strenuous	effort	to	free	oneself
from	sinful	reactions.	One	should	unhesitatingly	accept	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	supreme
savior	of	all	living	entities.	With	faith	and	love,	one	should	surrender	unto
Him.
According	to	the	devotional	process,	one	should	simply	accept	such
religious	principles	that	will	lead	ultimately	to	the	devotional	service	of	the
Lord.	One	may	perform	a	particular	occupational	duty	according	to	his
position	in	the	social	order,	but	if	by	executing	his	duty	one	does	not	come	to
the	point	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	all	his	activities	are	in	vain.	Anything	that
does	not	lead	to	the	perfectional	stage	of	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	should	be
avoided.	One	should	be	confident	that	in	all	circumstances	Kṛṣṇa	will	protect
him	from	all	difficulties.	There	is	no	need	of	thinking	how	one	should	keep
the	body	and	soul	together.	Kṛṣṇa	will	see	to	that.	One	should	always	think
himself	helpless	and	should	consider	Kṛṣṇa	the	only	basis	for	his	progress	in
life.	As	soon	as	one	seriously	engages	himself	in	devotional	service	to	the
Lord	in	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	at	once	he	becomes	freed	from	all
contamination	of	material	nature.	There	are	different	processes	of	religion	and
purificatory	processes	by	cultivation	of	knowledge,	meditation	in	the	mystic
yoga
	system,	etc.,	but	one	who	surrenders	unto	Kṛṣṇa	does	not	have	to	execute
so	many	methods.	That	simple	surrender	unto	Kṛṣṇa	will	save	him	fromunnecessarily	wasting	time.	One	can	thus	make	all	progress	at	once	and	be
freed	from	all	sinful	reaction.
One	should	be	attracted	by	the	beautiful	vision	of	Kṛṣṇa.	His	name	is	Kṛṣṇa
because	He	is	all-attractive.	One	who	becomes	attracted	by	the	beautiful,	all-
powerful,	omnipotent	vision	of	Kṛṣṇa	is	fortunate.	There	are	different	kinds	of
transcendentalists–some	of	them	are	attached	to	the	impersonal	Brahman
vision,	some	of	them	are	attracted	by	the	Supersoul	feature,	etc.,	but	one	who
is	attracted	to	the	personal	feature	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
and,	above	all,	one	who	is	attracted	by	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	as
Kṛṣṇa	Himself,	is	the	most	perfect	transcendentalist.	In	other	words,
devotional	service	to	Kṛṣṇa,	in	full	consciousness,	is	the	most	confidential	part
of	knowledge,	and	this	is	the	essence	of	the	whole	
Bhagavad-gītā.	Karma-
yogīs
,	empiric	philosophers,	mystics,	and	devotees	are	all	called
transcendentalists,	but	one	who	is	a	pure	devotee	is	the	best	of	all.	The
particular	words	used	here,	
mā	śucaḥ
,	"Don't	fear,	don't	hesitate,	don't	worry,"
are	very	significant.	One	may	be	perplexed	as	to	how	one	can	give	up	all
kinds	of	religious	forms	and	simply	surrender	unto	Kṛṣṇa,	but	such	worry	is
useless.
TEXT	67
इ द ं
	
त े
	
न ा त प ᇿ क ा य
	
न ा भ ᇧ त ा य
	
क द ा च न
	
।
न
	
च ा श ु श ् ኅ ष व े
	
व ा ᇫ य ं
	
न
	
च
	
म ा ं
	
य ो ऽ ᇷ य स ू य ि त
	
॥
६ ७
॥
idaṁ	te	nātapaskāya
nābhaktāya	kadācana
na	cāśuśrūṣave	vācyaṁ
na	ca	māṁ	yo	'bhyasūyati
idam—
this;	
te—
you;
	na—
never;	
atapaskāya—
one	who	is	not	austere;	
na—
never;	
abhaktāya—
one	who	is	not	a	devotee;	
kadācana—
at	any	time;	
na—
never;	
ca—
also;	
aśuśrūṣave—
one	who	is	not	engaged	in	devotional	service;
vācyam—
to	be	spoken;	
na—
never;	
ca—
also;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
yaḥ—
anyone;
abhyasūyati—
envious.
TRANSLATIONThis	confidential	knowledge	may	not	be	explained	to	those	who	are	not
austere,	or	devoted,	or	engaged	in	devotional	service,	nor	to	one	who	is
envious	of	Me.
PURPORT
Persons	who	have	not	undergone	the	austerities	of	the	religious	process,
who	have	never	attempted	devotional	service	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness,	who
have	not	tended	a	pure	devotee,	and	especially	those	who	are	conscious	of
Kṛṣṇa	as	a	historical	personality	or	who	are	envious	of	the	greatness	of	Kṛṣṇa,
should	not	be	told	this	most	confidential	part	of	knowledge.	It	is,	however,
sometimes	found	that	even	demoniac	persons	who	are	envious	of	Kṛṣṇa,
worshiping	Kṛṣṇa	in	a	different	way,	take	to	the	profession	of	explaining
Bhagavad-gītā	
in	a	different	way	to	make	business,	but	anyone	who	desires
actually	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa	must	avoid	such	commentaries	on	
Bhagavad-
gītā.	
Actually	the	purpose	of	
Bhagavad-gītā	
is	not	understandable	to	those
who	are	sensuous–even	if	one	is	not	sensuous	but	is	strictly	following	the
disciplines	enjoined	in	the	Vedic	scripture,	if	he	is	not	a	devotee,	he	also
cannot	understand	Kṛṣṇa.	Even	when	one	poses	himself	as	a	devotee	of	Kṛṣṇa,
but	is	not	engaged	in	Kṛṣṇa	conscious	activities,	he	also	cannot	understand
Kṛṣṇa.	There	are	many	persons	who	envy	Kṛṣṇa	because	He	has	explained	in
Bhagavad-gītā	
that	He	is	the	Supreme	and	that	nothing	is	above	Him	or	equal
to	Him.	There	are	many	persons	who	are	envious	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Such	persons
should	not	be	told	of	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
for	they	cannot	understand.	There	is	no
possibility	of	faithless	persons'	understanding	
Bhagavad-gītā	
and	Kṛṣṇa.
Without	understanding	Kṛṣṇa	from	the	authority	of	a	pure	devotee,	one	should
not	try	to	comment	upon	
Bhagavad-gitā.
TEXT	68
य
	
इ द ं
	
प र म ं
	
ग ु ቋ ं
	
म द ् भ ᇧ त े ᇾ व ि भ ध ा ᇿ य ि त
	
।
भ ि ᇧ त ं
	
म ि य
	
प र ा ं
	
क ृ ᇰ व ा
	
म ा म े व ै ᇾ य ᇰ य स ं श य ः
	
॥
६ ८
॥
ya	idaṁ	paramaṁ	guhyaṁ
mad-bhakteṣv	abhidhāsyati
bhaktiṁ	mayi	parāṁ	kṛtvā
mām	evaiṣyaty	asaṁśayaḥyaḥ—
anyone;	
idam—
this;	
paramam—
most;	
guhyam—
confidential;	
mat—
Mine;	
bhakteṣu—
amongst	devotees	of;	
abhidhāsyati—
explains;	
bhaktim—
devotional	service;	
mayi—
unto	Me;	
parām—
transcendental;	
kṛtvā—
having
done;	
mām—
unto	Me;	
eva—
certainly;	
eṣyati—
comes;	
asaṁśayaḥ—
without
doubt.
TRANSLATION
For	one	who	explains	the	supreme	secret	to	the	devotees,	devotional
service	is	guaranteed,	and	at	the	end	he	will	come	back	to	Me.
PURPORT
Generally	it	is	advised	that	
Bhagavad-gītā	
be	discussed	amongst	the
devotees	only,	for	those	who	are	not	devotees	will	neither	understand	Kṛṣṇa
nor	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
Those	who	do	not	accept	Kṛṣṇa	as	He	is	and	
Bhagavad-
gītā	
as	it	is	should	not	try	to	explain	
Bhagavad-gītā	
whimsically	and	become
offenders.	
Bhagavad-gītā	
should	be	explained	to	persons	who	are	ready	to
accept	Kṛṣṇa	as	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	It	is	a	subject	matter	for
the	devotees	only	and	not	for	philosophical	speculators.	Anyone,	however,
who	tries	sincerely	to	present	
Bhagavad-gītā	
as	it	is	will	advance	in
devotional	activities	and	reach	the	pure	devotional	state	of	life.	As	a	result	of
such	pure	devotion,	he	is	sure	to	go	back	home,	back	to	Godhead.
TEXT	69
न
	
च
	
त ᇿ म ा ᇳ म न ु ᇾ य े ष ु
	
क ि ᇽ च ᇳ म े
	
ि प ् र य क ृ ሧ म ः
	
।
भ ि व त ा
	
न
	
च
	
म े
	
त ᇿ म ा द ᇳ य ः
	
ि प ् र य त र ो
	
भ ु ि व
	
॥
६ ९
॥
na	ca	tasmān	manuṣyeṣu
kaścin	me	priya-kṛttamaḥ
bhavitā	na	ca	me	tasmād
anyaḥ	priyataro	bhuvi
na—
never;	
ca—
and;	
tasmāt—
therefore;	
manuṣyeṣu—
among	mankind;
kaścit—
anyone;	
me—
My;
	priya-kṛttamaḥ—
more	dear;	
bhavitā—
will	become;na—
no;	
ca—
and;	
me—
My;
	tasmāt—
than	him;	
anyaḥ—
other;	
priyataraḥ—
dearer;	
bhuvi—
in	this	world.
TRANSLATION
There	is	no	servant	in	this	world	more	dear	to	Me	than	he,	nor	will
there	ever	be	one	more	dear.
TEXT	70
अ ᇲ य े ᇾ य त े
	
च
	
य
	
इ म ं
	
ध ᇸ य ᆾ
	
स ं व ा द म ा व य ो ः
	
।
ᇥ ा न य ᇥ े न
	
त े न ा ह ि म ᇾ ट ः
	
ᇿ य ा ि म ि त
	
म े
	
म ि त ः
	
॥
७ ०
॥
adhyeṣyate	ca	ya	imaṁ
dharmyaṁ	saṁvādam	āvayoḥ
jñāna-yajñena	tenāham
iṣṭaḥ	syām	iti	me	matiḥ
adhyeṣyate—
will	study;	
ca—
also;	
yaḥ—
he;	
imam—
this;	
dharmyaṁ—
sacred;	
saṁvādam—
conversation;	
āvayoḥ—
of	ours;	
jñāna—
knowledge;
yajñena—
by	sacrifice;	
tena—
by	him;	
aham—
I;
	iṣṭaḥ—
worshiped;	
syām—
shall
be;	
iti—
thus;	
me—
My;
	matiḥ—
opinion.
TRANSLATION
And	I	declare	that	he	who	studies	this	sacred	conversation	worships	Me
by	his	intelligence.
TEXT	71
श ् र ሬ ा व ा न न स ू य ᇽ च
	
श ृ ण ु य ा द ि प
	
य ो
	
न र ः
	
।
स ो ऽ ि प
	
म ु ᇧ त ः
	
श ु भ ा ँ ᇺ ल ो क ा ᇳ प ् र ा ᇴ न ु य ा ᇰ प ु ᇯ य क म ᆼ ण ा म ्
	
॥
७ १
॥
śraddhāvān	anasūyaś	ca
śṛṇuyād	api	yo	naraḥso	'pi	muktaḥ	śubhāl	lokān
prāpnuyāt	puṇya-karmaṇām
sraddhāvan—
faithful;	
anasūyaḥ	ca—
and	not	envious;	
śṛṇuyāt
—does	hear;
api—
certainly;	
yaḥ—
who;	
naraḥ—
man;	
saḥ	api—
he	also;	
muktaḥ—
being
liberated;	
śubhān—
auspicious;	
lokān—
planets;	
prāpnuyāt—
attains;	
puṇya-
karmaṇām—
of	the	past.
TRANSLATION
And	one	who	listens	with	faith	and	without	envy	becomes	free	from
sinful	reaction	and	attains	to	the	planets	where	the	pious	dwell.
PURPORT
In	the	67th	verse	of	this	chapter,	the	Lord	explicitly	forbade	the	
Gītā's	
being
spoken	to	those	who	are	envious	of	the	Lord.	In	other	words,	
Bhagavad-gītā	
is
for	the	devotees	only,	but	it	so	happens	that	sometimes	a	devotee	of	the	Lord
will	hold	open	class,	and	in	that	class	all	the	students	are	not	expected	to	be
devotees.	Why	do	such	persons	hold	open	class?	It	is	explained	here	that
although	everyone	is	not	a	devotee,	still	there	are	many	men	who	are	not
envious	of	Kṛṣṇa.	They	have	faith	in	Him	as	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.	If	such	persons	hear	from	a	bona	fide	devotee	about	the	Lord,	the
result	is	that	they	become	at	once	free	from	all	sinful	reactions	and	after	that
attain	to	the	planetary	system	where	all	righteous	persons	are	situated.
Therefore	simply	by	hearing	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
even	a	person	who	does	not	try
to	be	a	pure	devotee	attains	the	result	of	righteous	activities.	Thus	a	pure
devotee	of	the	Lord	gives	everyone	a	chance	to	become	free	from	all	sinful
reactions	and	to	become	a	devotee	of	the	Lord.
Generally	those	who	are	free	from	sinful	reaction	are	righteous.	Such
persons	very	easily	take	to	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	The	word	
puṇya-	karmaṇām
is	very	significant	here.	This	refers	to	the	performance	of	great	sacrifice.
Those	who	are	righteous	in	performing	devotional	service	but	who	are	not
pure	can	attain	the	planetary	system	of	the	polestar,	or	Dhruvaloka,	where
Dhruva	Mahārāja	is	presiding.	He	is	a	great	devotee	of	the	Lord,	and	he	has	a
special	planet	which	is	called	the	polestar.TEXT	72
क ि ᇫ च द े त ᇫ छ ् ኄ त ं
	
प ा थ ᆼ
	
ᇰ व य ै क ा ग ् र े ण
	
च े त स ा
	
।
क ि ᇫ च द ᇥ ा न स ᇸ म ो ह ः
	
प ् र न ᇾ ट ᇿ त े
	
ध न ᇮ ज य
	
॥
७ २
॥
kaccid	etac	chrutaṁ	pārtha
tvayaikāgreṇa	cetasā
kaccid	ajñāna-sammohaḥ
praṇaṣṭas	te	dhanañjaya
kaccit—
whether;	
etat—
this;	
śrutam—
heard;	
pārtha
—O	son	of	Pṛthā;	
tvayā
—
by	you;	
ekāgreṇa—
with	full	attention;	
cetasā—
by	the	mind;	
kaccit—
whether;	
ajñāna
—ignorant;	
saṁmohaḥ—
illusion;	
praṇaṣṭaḥ
—dispelled;	
te—
of	you;	
dhanañjaya
—O	conqueror	of	wealth	(Arjuna).
TRANSLATION
O	conqueror	of	wealth,	Arjuna,	have	you	heard	this	attentively	with
your	mind?	And	are	your	illusions	and	ignorance	now	dispelled?
PURPORT
The	Lord	was	acting	as	the	spiritual	master	of	Arjuna.	Therefore	it	was	His
duty	to	inquire	from	Arjuna	whether	he	understood	the	whole	
Bhagavad-gītā
in	its	proper	perspective.	If	not,	the	Lord	was	ready	to	re-explain	any	point,	or
the	whole	
Bhagavad-gītā	
if	so	required.	Actually,	anyone	who	hears
Bhagavad-gītā	
from	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master	like	Kṛṣṇa	or	His
representative	will	find	that	all	his	ignorance	is	dispelled.	
Bhagavad-gītā
	is
not	an	ordinary	book	written	by	a	poet	or	fiction	writer;	it	is	spoken	by	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Any	person,	if	he	is	fortunate	enough	to
hear	these	teachings	from	Kṛṣṇa	or	from	His	bona	fide	spiritual	representative,
is	sure	to	become	a	liberated	person	and	get	out	of	the	darkness	of	ignorance.
TEXT	73
अ ज ु ᆼ न
	
उ व ा च
	
।न ᇾ ट ो
	
म ो ह ः
	
ᇿ म ृ ि त ल ᆼ ᇶ ध ा
	
ᇰ व ᇰ प ् र स ा द ा ᇳ म य ा ᇫ य ु त
	
।
ि ᇿ थ त ो ऽ ि ᇿ म
	
ग त स ᇳ द े ह ः
	
क ि र ᇾ य े
	
व च न ं
	
त व
	
॥
७ ३
॥
arjuna	uvāca
naṣṭo	mohaḥ	smṛtir	labdhā
tvat-prasādān	mayācyuta
sthito	'smi	gata-sandehaḥ
kariṣye	vacanaṁ	tava
arjunaḥ	uvāca—
Arjuna	said;	
naṣṭaḥ—
dispelled;	
mohaḥ—
illusion;	
smṛtiḥ—
memory;	
labdhā—
regained;	
tvat-prasādāt—
by	Your	mercy;	
mayā—
by	me;
acyuta
—O	infallible	Kṛṣṇa;	
sthitaḥ—
situated;	
asmi—
I	am;	
gata—
removed;
sandehaḥ—
all	doubts;	
kariṣye—
I	shall	execute;	
vacanam—
order;	
tava—
Your.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna	said,	My	dear	Kṛṣṇa,	O	infallible	one,	my	illusion	is	now	gone.	I
have	regained	my	memory	by	Your	mercy,	and	I	am	now	firm	and	free
from	doubt	and	am	prepared	to	act	according	to	Your	instructions.
PURPORT
The	constitutional	position	of	a	living	entity,	represented	by	Arjuna,	is	that
he	has	to	act	according	to	the	order	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	He	is	meant	for	self-
discipline.	Śrī	Caitanya	Mahāprabhu	says	that	the	actual	position	of	the	living
entity	is	that	of	eternal	servant	of	the	Supreme	Lord.	Forgetting	this	principle,
the	living	entity	becomes	conditioned	by	material	nature,	but	in	serving	the
Supreme	Lord,	he	becomes	the	liberated	servant	of	God.	The	living	entity's
constitutional	position	is	to	be	servitor;	he	either	has	to	serve	the	illusory	
māyā
or	the	Supreme	Lord.	If	he	serves	the	Supreme	Lord,	he	is	in	his	normal
condition,	but	if	he	prefers	to	serve	the	illusory	external	energy,	then	certainly
he	will	be	in	bondage.	In	illusion	the	living	entity	is	serving	in	this	material
world.	He	is	bound	by	his	lust	and	desires,	yet	he	thinks	of	himself	as	the
master	of	the	world.	This	is	called	illusion.	When	a	person	is	liberated,	his
illusion	is	over,	and	he	voluntarily	surrenders	unto	the	Supreme	to	act
according	to	His	desires.	The	last	illusion,	the	last	snare	of	
māyā	
to	trap	the
living	entity,	is	the	proposition	that	he	is	God.	The	living	entity	thinks	that	heis	no	longer	a	conditioned	soul,	but	God.	He	is	so	unintelligent	that	he	does
not	think	that	if	he	were	God,	then	how	could	he	be	in	doubt?	That	he	does	not
consider.	So	that	is	the	last	snare	of	illusion.	Actually	to	become	free	from	the
illusory	energy	is	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa,	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,
and	agree	to	act	according	to	His	order.	The	word	
mohaḥ
	is	very	important	in
this	verse.	
Mohaḥ	
refers	to	that	which	is	opposed	to	knowledge.	Actually	real
knowledge	is	the	understanding	that	every	living	being	is	eternally	servitor	of
the	Lord,	but	instead	of	thinking	oneself	in	that	position,	the	living	entity
thinks	that	he	is	not	servant,	that	he	is	the	master	of	this	material	world,	for	he
wants	to	lord	it	over	the	material	nature.	That	is	his	illusion.	This	illusion	can
be	overcome	by	the	mercy	of	the	Lord	or	by	the	mercy	of	a	pure	devotee.
When	that	illusion	is	over,	one	agrees	to	act	in	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.
Kṛṣṇa	consciousness	is	acting	according	to	Kṛṣṇa's	order.	A	conditioned
soul	illusioned	by	the	external	energy	of	matter	does	not	know	that	the
Supreme	Lord	is	the	master	who	is	full	of	knowledge	and	who	is	the
proprietor	of	everything.	Whatever	He	desires	He	can	bestow	upon	His
devotees;	He	is	the	friend	of	everyone,	and	He	is	especially	inclined	to	His
devotee.	He	is	the	controller	of	this	material	nature	and	of	all	living	entities.
He	is	also	the	controller	of	inexhaustible	time,	and	He	is	full	of	all	opulences
and	all	potencies.	The	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	can	even	give	Himself
to	the	devotee.	One	who	does	not	know	Him	is	under	the	spell	of	illusion;	he
does	not	become	a	devotee,	but	a	servitor	of	
māyā
.	Arjuna,	however,	after
hearing	
Bhagavad-gītā	
from	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	became
free	from	all	illusion.	He	could	understand	that	Kṛṣṇa	was	not	only	his	friend,
but	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	And	he	understood	Kṛṣṇa	factually.
So	to	study	
Bhagavad-gītā	
is	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa	factually.	When	a	person	is
in	full	knowledge,	he	naturally	surrenders	to	Kṛṣṇa.	When	Arjuna	understood
that	it	was	Kṛṣṇa's	plan	to	reduce	the	unnecessary	increase	of	population,	he
agreed	to	fight	according	to	Kṛṣṇa's	desire.	He	again	took	up	his	weapons
—
his
arrows	and	bow
—
to	fight	under	the	order	of	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead.
TEXT	74
स ᇮ ज य
	
उ व ा च
	
।
इ ᇰ य ह ं
	
व ा स ु द े व ᇿ य
	
प ा थ ᆼ ᇿ य
	
च
	
म ह ा ᇰ म न ः
	
।
स ं व ा द ि म म म श ् र ौ ष म द ् भ ु त ं
	
र ो म ह ष ᆼ ण म ्
	
॥
७ ४
॥sañjaya	uvāca
ity	ahaṁ	vāsudevasya
pārthasya	ca	mahātmanaḥ
saṁvādam	imam	aśrauṣam
adbhutaṁ	roma-harṣaṇam
sañjayaḥ	uvāca—
Sañjaya	said;	
iti—
thus;	
aham—
I;
	vāsudevasya—
of	Kṛṣṇa;
pārthasya—
of	Arjuna;	
ca—
also;
	mahātmanaḥ—
two	great	souls;	
saṁvādam—
discussing;	
imam
—this;	
aśrauṣam—
heard;	
adbhutam—
wonder;
romaharṣaṇam
—hair	standing	on	end.
TRANSLATION
Sañjaya	said:	Thus	have	I	heard	the	conversation	of	two	great	souls,
Kṛṣṇa	and	Arjuna.	And	so	wonderful	is	that	message	that	my	hair	is
standing	on	end.
PURPORT
In	the	beginning	of	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
Dhṛtarāṣṭra	inquired	from	his	secretary
Sañjaya,	"What	happened	in	the	Battlefield	of	Kurukṣetra?"	The	entire	study
was	related	to	the	heart	of	Sañjaya	by	the	grace	of	his	spiritual	master,	Vyāsa.
He	thus	explained	the	theme	of	the	battlefield.	The	conversation	was
wonderful	because	such	an	important	conversation	between	two	great	souls
never	took	place	before	and	would	not	take	place	again.	It	is	wonderful
because	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead	is	speaking	about	Himself	and
His	energies	to	the	living	entity,	Arjuna,	a	great	devotee	of	the	Lord.	If	we
follow	in	the	footsteps	of	Arjuna	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa,	then	our	life	will	be
happy	and	successful.	Sañjaya	realized	this,	and	as	he	began	to	understand	it,
he	related	the	conversation	to	Dhṛtarāṣṭra.	Now	it	is	concluded	that	wherever
there	is	Kṛṣṇa	and	Arjuna,	there	is	victory.
TEXT	75
ᇼ य ा स प ् र स ा द ा ᇫ छ ् ኄ त व ा न े त द ् ग ु ቋ म ह ं
	
प र म ्
	
।
य ो ग ं
	
य ो ग े ᇽ व र ा ᇰ क ृ ᇾ ण ा ᇰ स ा ᇤ ा ᇰ क थ य त ः
	
ᇿ व य म ्
	
॥
७ ५
॥vyāsa-prasādāc	chrutavān
etad	guhyam	ahaṁ	param
yogaṁ	yogeśvarāt	kṛṣṇāt
sākṣāt	kathayataḥ	svayam
vyāsa-prasādāt—
by	the	mercy	of	Vyāsadeva;	
śrutavān—
heard;	
etat—
this;
guhyam—
confidential;	
aham—
I;
	param—
the	supreme;	
yogam—
mysticism;
yogeśvarāt—
from	the	master	of	all	mysticism;	
kṛṣṇāt—
from	Kṛṣṇa;	
sākṣāt—
directly;	
kathayataḥ—
speaking;	
svayam—
personally.
TRANSLATION
By	the	mercy	of	Vyāsa,	I	have	heard	these	most	confidential	talks
directly	from	the	master	of	all	mysticism,	Kṛṣṇa,	who	was	speaking
personally	to	Arjuna.
PURPORT
Vyāsa	was	the	spiritual	master	of	Sañjaya,	and	Sañjaya	admits	that	it	was	by
his	mercy	that	he	could	understand	the	Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	This
means	that	one	has	to	understand	Kṛṣṇa	not	directly	but	through	the	medium
of	the	spiritual	master.	The	spiritual	master	is	the	transparent	medium,
although	it	is	true	that	the	experience	is	direct.	This	is	the	mystery	of	the
disciplic	succession.	When	the	spiritual	master	is	bona	fide,	then	one	can	hear
Bhagavad-gītā	
directly,	as	Arjuna	heard	it.	There	are	many	mystics	and	
yogīs
all	over	the	world,	but	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	master	of	all	
yoga	
systems.	Kṛṣṇa's
instruction	is	explicitly	stated	in	
Bhagavad-gītā
—surrender	unto	Kṛṣṇa.	One
who	does	so	is	the	topmost	
yogī
.	This	is	confirmed	in	the	last	verse	of	the
Sixth	Chapter.	
Yoginām	api	sarveṣām.
Nārada	is	the	direct	disciple	of	Kṛṣṇa	and	the	spiritual	master	of	Vyāsa.
Therefore	Vyāsa	is	as	bona	fide	as	Arjuna	because	he	comes	in	the	disciplic
succession,	and	Sañjaya	is	the	direct	disciple	of	Vyāsa.	Therefore	by	the	grace
of	Vyāsa,	his	senses	were	purified,	and	he	could	see	and	hear	Kṛṣṇa	directly.
One	who	directly	hears	Kṛṣṇa	can	understand	this	confidential	knowledge.	If
one	does	not	come	to	the	disciplic	succession,	he	cannot	hear	Kṛṣṇa;	therefore
his	knowledge	is	always	imperfect,	at	least	as	far	as	understanding	
Bhagavad-
gītā	
is	concerned.In	
Bhagavad-gītā,	
all	the	
yoga	
systems,	
karma-yoga,	jñāna-yoga	
and
bhakti-yoga,	
are	explained.	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	master	of	all	such	mysticism.	It	is	to
be	understood,	however,	that	as	Arjuna	was	fortunate	enough	to	understand
Kṛṣṇa	directly,	similarly,	by	the	grace	of	Vyāsa,	Sañjaya	was	also	able	to	hear
Kṛṣṇa	directly.	Actually	there	is	no	difference	in	hearing	directly	from	Kṛṣṇa
or	hearing	directly	from	Kṛṣṇa	via	a	bona	fide	spiritual	master	like	Vyāsa.	The
spiritual	master	is	the	representative	of	Vyāsadeva	also.	According	to	the
Vedic	system,	on	the	birthday	of	the	spiritual	master,	the	disciples	conduct	the
ceremony	called	
Vyāsa-pūjā.
TEXT	76
र ा ज ᇳ स ं ᇿ म ृ ᇰ य
	
स ं ᇿ म ृ ᇰ य
	
स ं व ा द ि म म म द ् भ ु त म ्
	
।
क े श व ा ज ु ᆼ न य ो ः
	
प ु ᇯ य ं
	
ᇦ ᇾ य ा ि म
	
च
	
म ु ह ु म ु ᆼ ह ु ः
	
॥
७ ६
॥
rājan	saṁsmṛtya	saṁsmṛtya
saṁvādam	imam	adbhutam
keśavārjunayoḥ	puṇyaṁ
hṛṣyāmi	ca	muhur	muhuḥ
rājan
—O	King;	
saṁsmṛtya—
remembering;	
saṁsmṛtya—
remembering;
saṁvādam—
message;	
imam—
this;	
adbhutam—
wonderful;	
keśava—
Lord
Kṛṣṇa;	
arjunayoḥ—
and	Arjuna;	
puṇyam—
pious;	
hṛṣyāmi—
taking	pleasure;	
ca
—
also;	
muhuḥ	muhuḥ—
always,	repeatedly.
TRANSLATION
O	King,	as	I	repeatedly	recall	this	wondrous	and	holy	dialogue	between
Kṛṣṇa	and	Arjuna,	I	take	pleasure,	being	thrilled	at	every	moment.
PURPORT
The	understanding	of	
Bhagavad-gītā
	is	so	transcendental	that	anyone	who
becomes	conversant	with	the	topics	of	Arjuna	and	Kṛṣṇa	becomes	righteous,
and	he	cannot	forget	such	talks.	This	is	the	transcendental	position	of	spiritual
life.	In	other	words,	one	who	hears	the	
Gītā	
from	the	right	source,	directlyfrom	Kṛṣṇa,	attains	full	Kṛṣṇa	consciousness.	The	result	of	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	that	one	becomes	increasingly	enlightened,	and	he	enjoys	life
with	a	thrill,	not	only	for	some	time,	but	at	every	moment.
TEXT	77
त ᇫ च
	
स ं ᇿ म ृ ᇰ य
	
स ं ᇿ म ृ ᇰ य
	
ኅ प म ᇰ य द ् भ ु त ं
	
ह र े ः
	
।
ि व ᇿ म य ो
	
म े
	
म ह ा न
	
र ा ज ᇳ ᇦ ᇾ य ा ि म
	
च
	
प ु न ः
	
प ु न ः
	
॥
७ ७
॥
tac	ca	saṁsmṛtya	saṁsmṛtya
rūpam	aty-adbhutaṁ	hareḥ
vismayo	me	mahān	rājan
hṛṣyāmi	ca	punaḥ	punaḥ
tat—
that;	
ca—
also;	
saṁsmṛtya—
remembering;	
saṁsmṛtya—
remembering;
rūpam—
form;	
ati—
great;	
adbhutam—
wonderful;	
hareḥ
—of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa;
vismayaḥ—
wonder;	
me—
my;	
mahān—
great;	
rājan
—O	King,	
hṛṣyāmi
—
enjoying;	
ca—
also;	
punaḥ	punaḥ—
repeatedly.
TRANSLATION
O	King,	when	I	remember	the	wonderful	form	of	Lord	Kṛṣṇa,	I	am
struck	with	even	greater	wonder,	and	I	rejoice	again	and	again.
PURPORT
It	appears	that	Sañjaya	also,	by	the	grace	of	Vyāsa,	could	see	the	universal
form	of	Kṛṣṇa	exhibited	to	Arjuna.	It	is,	of	course,	said	that	Lord	Kṛṣṇa	never
exhibited	such	a	form	before.	It	was	exhibited	to	Arjuna	only,	yet	some	great
devotees	could	also	see	the	universal	form	of	Kṛṣṇa	when	it	was	shown	to
Arjuna,	and	Vyāsa	was	one	of	them.	He	is	one	of	the	great	devotees	of	the
Lord,	and	he	is	considered	to	be	a	powerful	incarnation	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Vyāsa
disclosed	this	to	his	disciple,	Sañjaya,	who	remembered	that	wonderful	form
of	Kṛṣṇa	exhibited	to	Arjuna	and	enjoyed	it	repeatedly.
TEXT	78य त ् र
	
य ो ग े ᇽ व र ः
	
क ृ ᇾ ण ो
	
य त ् र
	
प ा थ ो ᆼ
	
ध न ु ध ᆼ र ः
	
।
त त ् र
	
श ् र ी ि व ᆼ ज य ो
	
भ ू ि त ध ् ኄ ᆼ व ा
	
न ी ि त म ᆼ ि त म ᆼ म
	
॥
७ ८
॥
yatra	yogeśvaraḥ	kṛṣṇo
yatra	pārtho	dhanur-dharaḥ
tatra	śrīr	vijayo	bhūtir
dhruvā	nītir	matir	mama
yatra—
where;	
yogeśvaraḥ—
the	master	of	mysticism;	
kṛṣṇaḥ—
Lord	Krṣna;
yatra—
where;	
pārthaḥ—
the	son	of	Pṛthā;
	dhanur-dharaḥ—
the	carrier	of	the
bow	and	arrow;	
tatra—
there;	
śrīḥ—
opulence;	
vijayaḥ—
victory;	
bhūtiḥ—
exceptional	power;	
dhruvā—
certainly;	
nītiḥ—
morality;	
matiḥ	mama—
is	my
opinion.
TRANSLATION
Wherever	there	is	Kṛṣṇa,	the	master	of	all	mystics,	and	wherever	there
is	Arjuna,	the	supreme	archer,	there	will	also	certainly	be	opulence,
victory,	extraordinary	power,	and	morality.	That	is	my	opinion.
PURPORT
The	
Bhagavad-gītā	
began	with	an	inquiry	of	Dhṛtarāṣṭra.	He	was	hopeful	of
the	victory	of	his	sons,	assisted	by	great	warriors	like	Bhīṣma,	Droṇa	and
Karṇa.	He	was	hopeful	that	the	victory	would	be	on	his	side.	But,	after
describing	the	scene	in	the	battlefield,	Sañjaya	told	the	King,	"You	are
thinking	of	victory,	but	my	opinion	is	that	where	Kṛṣṇa	and	Arjuna	are
present,	there	will	be	all	good	fortune."	He	directly	confirmed	that	Dhṛtarāṣṭra
could	not	expect	victory	for	his	side.	Victory	was	certain	for	the	side	of	Arjuna
because	Kṛṣṇa	was	there.	Kṛṣṇa's	acceptance	of	the	post	of	charioteer	for
Arjuna	was	an	exhibition	of	another	opulence.	Kṛṣṇa	is	full	of	all	opulences,
and	renunciation	is	one	of	them.	There	are	many	instances	of	such
renunciation,	for	Kṛṣṇa	is	also	the	master	of	renunciation.
The	fight	was	actually	between	Duryodhana	and	Yudhiṣṭhira.	Arjuna	was
fighting	on	behalf	of	his	elder	brother,	Yudhiṣṭhira.	Because	Kṛṣṇa	and	Arjuna
were	on	the	side	of	Yudhiṣṭhira,	Yudhiṣṭhira's	victory	was	certain.	The	battle
was	to	decide	who	would	rule	the	world,	and	Sañjaya	predicted	that	the	powerwould	be	transferred	to	Yudhiṣṭhira.	It	is	also	predicted	here	that	Yudhiṣṭhira,
after	gaining	victory	in	this	battle,	would	flourish	more	and	more	because	he
was	not	only	righteous	and	pious,	but	he	was	a	strict	moralist.	He	never	spoke
a	lie	during	his	life.
There	are	many	less	intelligent	persons	who	take	
Bhagavad-gītā	
to	be	a
discussion	of	topics	between	two	friends	in	a	battlefield.	But	such	a	book
cannot	be	scripture.	Some	may	protest	that	Kṛṣṇa	incited	Arjuna	to	fight,
which	is	immoral,	but	the	reality	of	the	situation	is	clearly	stated:	
Bhagavad-
gītā	
is	the	supreme	instruction	in	morality.	The	supreme	instruction	of
morality	is	stated	in	the	Ninth	Chapter,	in	the	thirty-fourth	verse:	
manmanā
bhava	mad-bhaktaḥ.	
One	must	become	a	devotee	of	Kṛṣṇa,	and	the	essence	of
all	religion	is	to	surrender	unto	Kṛṣṇa,	as	stated,	
Sarva-dharmān.	
The
instructions	of	
Bhagavad-gītā	
constitute	the	supreme	process	of	religion	and
of	morality.	All	other	processes	may	be	purifying	and	may	lead	to	this	process,
but	the	last	instruction	of	the	
Gītā
	is	the	last	word	in	all	morality	and	religion:
surrender	unto	Kṛṣṇa.	This	is	the	verdict	of	the	Eighteenth	Chapter.
From	
Bhagavad-gītā	
we	can	understand	that	to	realize	oneself	by
philosophical	speculation	and	by	meditation	is	one	process,	but	to	fully
surrender	unto	Kṛṣṇa	is	the	highest	perfection.	This	is	the	essence	of	the
teachings	of	
Bhagavad-gītā.	
The	path	of	regulative	principles	according	to	the
orders	of	social	life	and	according	to	the	different	courses	of	religion	may	be	a
confidential	path	of	knowledge	in	as	far	as	the	rituals	of	religion	are
confidential,	but	one	is	still	involved	with	meditation	and	cultivation	of
knowledge.	Surrender	unto	Kṛṣṇa	in	devotional	service	in	full	Kṛṣṇa
consciousness	is	the	most	confidential	instruction	and	is	the	essence	of	the
Eighteenth	Chapter.
Another	feature	of	
Bhagavad-gītā	
is	that	the	actual	truth	is	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa.	Absolute	Truth	is	realized	in	three	features
—
impersonal	Brahman,	localized	Paramātmā,	and	the	Supreme	Personality	of
Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa.	Perfect	knowledge	of	the	Absolute	Truth	means	perfect
knowledge	of	Kṛṣṇa.	If	one	understands	Kṛṣṇa,	then	all	the	departments	of
knowledge	are	part	and	parcel	of	that	understanding.	Kṛṣṇa	is	transcendental,
for	He	is	always	situated	in	His	eternal	internal	potency.	The	living	entities	are
manifested	and	are	divided	into	two	classes,	eternally	conditioned	and
eternally	liberated.	Such	living	entities	are	innumerable,	and	they	are
considered	fundamental	parts	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Material	energy	is	manifested	into
twenty-four	divisions.	The	creation	is	effected	by	eternal	time,	and	it	is	created
and	dissolved	by	external	energy.	This	manifestation	of	the	cosmic	worldrepeatedly	becomes	visible	and	invisible.
In	
Bhagavad-gītā	
five	principal	subject	matters	have	been	discussed:	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead,	material	nature,	the	living	entities,	eternal
time	and	all	kinds	of	activities.	All	of	these	are	dependent	on	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	Kṛṣṇa.	All	conceptions	of	the	Absolute	Truth,
namely,	impersonal	Brahman,	localized	Paramātmā,	or	any	other
transcendental	conception,	exist	within	the	category	of	understanding	the
Supreme	Personality	of	Godhead.	Although	superficially	the	Supreme
Personality	of	Godhead,	the	living	entity,	material	nature	and	time	appear	to
be	different,	nothing	is	different	from	the	Supreme.	But	the	Supreme	is	always
different	from	everything.	Lord	Caitanya's	philosophy	is	that	of
"inconceivably	one	and	different."	This	system	of	philosophy	constitutes
perfect	knowledge	of	the	Absolute	Truth.
The	living	entity	in	his	original	position	is	pure	spirit.	He	is	just	like	an
atomic	particle	of	the	Supreme	Spirit.	The	conditioned	living	entity,	however,
is	the	marginal	energy	of	the	Lord;	he	tends	to	be	in	contact	with	both	the
material	energy	and	the	spiritual	energy.	In	other	words,	the	living	entity	is
situated	between	the	two	energies	of	the	Lord,	and	because	he	belongs	to	the
superior	energy	of	the	Lord,	he	has	a	particle	of	independence.	By	proper	use
of	that	independence	he	comes	under	the	direct	order	of	Kṛṣṇa.	Thus	he	attains
his	normal	condition	in	the	pleasure-giving	potency.
Thus	end	the	Bhaktivedanta	Purports	to	the	Eighteenth	Chapter	of	the
Śrīmad-Bhagavad-gītā
	in	the	matter	of	its	Conclusions
—
the	Perfection	of
Renunciation.Back	cover