UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
___________________________________________
FORM 10-K  
___________________________________________
(Mark One)
☒ ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2023  
OR
☐ TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from              to             .
Commission file number: 001-37580  
___________________________________________
Alphabet Inc.  
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
___________________________________________
Delaware 61-1767919
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization) (I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
1600 Amphitheatre Parkway  
Mountain View , CA 94043  
(Address of principal executive offices, including zip code)
(650) 253-0000  
(Registrant's telephone number, including area code)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class Trading Symbol(s) Name of each exchange on which registered
Class A Common Stock, $0.001 par value GOOGL Nasdaq Stock Market LLC
(Nasdaq Global Select Market)
Class C Capital Stock, $0.001 par value GOOG Nasdaq Stock Market LLC
(Nasdaq Global Select Market)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
Title of each class
None
___________________________________________
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities 
Act.    Yes  ☒    No  ☐
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the 
Act.    Yes  ☐   No  ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such 
reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.    Yes  ☒    No  ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted 
pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that 
the registrant was required to submit such files).    Yes  ☒    No  ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller 
reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller 
reporting company,” and "emerging growth company" in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.Large accelerated filer ☒  Accelerated filer ☐
Non-accelerated filer ☐ Smaller reporting company ☐
Emerging growth company ☐
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for 
complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act.                            
☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its management's assessment of the 
effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting under Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C.7262(b)) by 
the registered public accounting firm that prepared or issued its audit report. ☒
If securities are registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act, indicate by check mark whether the financial statements of the 
registrant included in the filing reflect the correction of an error to previously issued financial statements. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether any of those error corrections are restatements that required a recovery analysis of incentive-based 
compensation received by any of the registrant's executive officers during the relevant recovery period pursuant to §240.10D-1(b). ☐ 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).    Yes  ☐    No  ☒
As of June 30, 2023 , the aggregate market value of shares held by non-affiliates of the registrant (based upon the closing sale 
prices of such shares on the Nasdaq Global Select Market on June 30, 2023 ) was approximately $1,331.2 billion . For purposes of 
calculating the aggregate market value of shares held by non-affiliates, we have assumed that all outstanding shares are held by 
non-affiliates, except for shares held by each of our executive officers, directors, and 5% or greater stockholders. In the case of 5% 
or greater stockholders, we have not deemed such stockholders to be affiliates unless there are facts and circumstances which 
would indicate that such stockholders exercise any control over our company, or unless they hold 10% or more of our outstanding 
common stock. These assumptions should not be deemed to constitute an admission that all executive officers, directors, and 5% or 
greater stockholders are, in fact, affiliates of our company, or that there are not other persons who may be deemed to be affiliates of 
our company. Further information concerning shareholdings of our officers, directors, and principal stockholders is included or 
incorporated by reference in Part III, Item 12 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
As of January 23, 2024 , there wer e 5,893 million  shares of Alphabet’s Class A stock outstanding, 869 million  shares of Alphabet’s 
Class B stock outstanding, and 5,671 million  shares of the Alphabet’s Class C stock outstanding.
___________________________________________
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Portions of the registrant’s Proxy Statement for the 2024  Annual Meeting of Stockholders are incorporated herein by reference in 
Part III of this Annual Report on Form 10-K to the extent stated herein. Such proxy statement will be filed with the Securities and 
Exchange Commission within 120 days of the registrant’s fiscal year ended December 31, 2023 .
 Alphabet Inc.
Form 10-K
For the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2023  
TABLE OF CONTENTS
  Page
Note About Forward-Looking Statements 3
PART I
Item 1. Business 4
Item 1A. Risk Factors 11
Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments 24
Item 1C. Cybersecurity 24
Item 2. Properties 25
Item 3. Legal Proceedings 25
Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures 25
PART II
Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters, and Issuer Purchases 
of Equity Securities25
Item 6. [Reserved] 28
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations 29
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk 45
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data 47
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure 88
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures 88
Item 9B. Other Information 89
Item 9C. Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent Inspections 89
PART III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers, and Corporate Governance 90
Item 11. Executive Compensation 90
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder 
Matters90
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence 90
Item 14. Principal Accountant Fees and Services 90
PART IV
Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules 91
Item 16. Form 10-K Summary 94
SignaturesTable of Contents Alphabet Inc.
2.  Note About Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private 
Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These include, among other things, statements regarding:
•the growth of our business and revenues and our expectations about the factors that influence our success 
and trends in our business;
•fluctuations in our revenues and margins and various factors contributing to such fluctuations;
•our expectation that the continuing shift from an offline to online world will continue to benefit our business;
•our expectation that the portion of our revenues that we derive beyond advertising will continue to increase 
and may affect our margins;
•our expectation that our traffic acquisition costs (TAC) and the associated TAC rate will fluctuate, which could 
affect our overall margins;
•our expectation that our monetization trends will fluctuate, which could affect ou r revenues and margins;
•fluctuations in paid clicks and cost-per-click as well as impressions and cost-per-impression, and various 
factors contributing to such fluctuations;
•our expectation that we will continue to periodically review, refine, and update our methodologies for 
monitoring, gathering, and counting the number of paid clicks and impressions;
•our expectation that our results will be affected by our performance in international markets as users in 
developing economies increasingly come online;
•our expectation that our foreign exchange risk management program will not fully offset our net exposure to 
fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates;
•the expected variability of gains and losses related to hedging activities under our foreign exchange risk 
management program;
•the amount and timing of revenue recognition from customer contracts with commitments for performance 
obligations, including our estimate of the remaining amount of commitments and when we expect to recognize 
revenue;
•our expectation that our capital expenditures will increase, including the expected increase in our technical 
infrastructure investment to support the growth of our business and our long-term initiatives, in particular in 
support of artificial intelligence (AI) products and services;
•our plans to continue to invest in new businesses, products, services and technologies, and systems, as well 
as to continue to invest in acquisitions and strategic investments;
•our pace of hiring and our plans to provide competitive compensation programs;
•our expectation that our cost of revenues, research and development (R&D) expenses, sales and marketing 
expenses, and general and administrative expenses may increase in amount and/or may increase as a 
percentage of revenues and may be affected by a number of factors;
•estimates of our future compensation expenses;
•our expectation that our other income (expense), net (OI&E), will fluctuate in the future, as it is largely driven 
by market dynamics;
•our expectation that our effective tax rate  and cash tax payments could increase in future years;
•seasonal fluctuations in internet usage and advertiser expenditures , underlying business trends such as 
traditional retail seasonality, which are likely to cause fluctuations in our quarterly results;
•the sufficiency of our sources of funding;
•our potential exposure in connection with new and pending investigations, proceedings, and other 
contingencies, including the possibility that certain legal proceedings to which we are a party could harm our 
business , financial condition, and operating results;
•our expectation that we will continue to face heightened regulatory scrutiny and cha nges in regulatory 
conditions, laws, and public policies,  which could affect our business practices and financial results;Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
3.  •the expected timing, amount, and effect of Alphabet Inc.'s share repurchases;
•our long-term sustainability and diversity goals;
as well as other statements regarding our future operations, financial condition and prospects, and business strategies. 
Forward-looking statements may appear throughout this report and other documents we file with the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC), including without limitation, the following sections: Part I, Item 1 "Business;" Part I, Item 
1A "Risk Factors;" and Part II, Item 7 "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of 
Operations." Forward-looking statements generally can be identified by words such as "anticipates," "believes," 
"could," "estimates," "expects," "intends," "may," "plans," "predicts," "projects," "will be," "will continue," "will likely 
result," and similar expressions. These forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and 
assumptions that are subject to risks and uncertainties, which could cause our actual results to differ materially from 
those reflected in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, 
but are not limited to, those discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including the risks discussed in Part I, Item 
1A "Risk Factors" and the trends discussed in Part II, Item 7 "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial 
Condition and Results of Operations," and those discussed in other documents we file with the SEC. We undertake no 
obligation to revise or publicly release the results of any revision to these forward-looking statements, except as 
required by law. Given these risks and uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such 
forward-looking statements.
As used herein, "Alphabet," "the company," "we," "us," "our," and similar terms include Alphabet Inc. and its 
subsidiaries, unless the context indicates otherwise.
"Alphabet," "Google," and other trademarks of ours appearing in this report are our property. We do not intend our 
use or display of other companies' trade names or trademarks to imply an endorsement or sponsorship of us by such 
companies, or any relationship with any of these companies.
PART I
ITEM 1. BUSINESS
Overview
As our founders Larry and Sergey wrote in the original founders' letter, "Google is not a conventional company. 
We do not intend to become one." That unconventional spirit has been a driving force throughout our history, inspiring 
us to tackle big problems and invest in moonshots . It led us to be a pioneer in the development of AI and, since 2016, 
an AI-first company. We continue this work under the leadership of Alphabet and Google CEO, Sundar Pichai.
Alphabet is a collection of businesses — the largest of which is Google. We report Google in two segments, 
Google Services  and Google Cloud, and all non-Google businesses collectively as Other Bets. Alphabet's structure is 
about helping each of our businesses prosper through strong leaders and independence. 
Access and Technology for Everyone
The Internet is one of the world’s most powerful equalizers; it propels ideas, people, and businesses large and 
small. Our mission to organize the world’s information and make it universally accessible and useful is as relevant 
today as it was when we were founded in 1998. Since then, we have evolved from a company that helps people find 
answers to a company that also helps people get things done. 
We are focused on building an even more helpful Google for everyone, and we aspire to give everyone the tools 
they need to increase their knowledge, health, happiness, and success. Google Search  helps people find information 
and make sense of the world in more natural and intuitive ways, with trillions of searches on Google every year. 
YouTube provides people with entertainment, information, and opportunities to learn something new. Google Assistant 
offers the best way to get things done seamlessly across different devices, providing intelligent help throughout a 
person's day, no matter where they are. Google Cloud helps customers solve today’s business challenges, improve 
productivity, reduce costs, and unlock new growth engines. We are continually innovating and building new products 
and features that will help our users, partners, customers, and communities and have invested more than $150 billion 
in research and development in the last five years in support of these efforts .
Making AI H elpful for Everyone
AI is a transformational technology that can bring meaningful and positive change to people and societies across 
the world, and for our business. At Google, we have been bringing AI into our products and services for more than a 
decade and making them available to our users. Our journey began in 2001, when machine learning was first 
incorporated into Google Search to suggest better spellings to users searching the web. Today, AI in our products is Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
4.  used by billions of people globally through features like autocomplete suggestions in Google Search; translation across 
133 languages in Google Translate; and organization, searching, and editing in Google Photos.
Large language models (LLMs) are an exciting aspect of our work in AI based on deep learning architectures, 
such as the Transformer, a neural network architecture that we introduced in 2017 that helped with language 
understanding. This led to the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers, or BERT, in 2019 that helped 
Search understand the intent of user search queries better than ever before.
Google was a company built in the cloud, and we continue to invest in our Google Cloud offerings, including 
Google Cloud Platform and Google Workspace, to help organizations stay at the forefront of AI innovation with our AI-
optimized infrastructure, mature AI platform and world-class models, and assistive agents.
We believe AI can solve some of the hardest societal, scientific and engineering challenges of our time. For 
example, in 2020, Google DeepMind’s AlphaFold system solved a 50-year-old protein folding challenge. Since then, 
we have open-sourced to the scientific community 200 million of AlphaFold’s protein structures which are used to work 
on everything from accelerating new malaria vaccines to advancing cancer drug discovery and developing plastic-
eating enzymes. As another example, AI can also have a transformative effect on climate progress by providing helpful 
information, predicting climate-related events, and optimizing climate action. Using advanced AI and geospatial 
analysis, Google Research has developed flood forecasting models that can provide early warning and real-time 
flooding information to communities and individuals. 
As AI continues to improve rapidly, we are focused on giving helpful features to our users and customers as we 
deliver on our mission to organize the world’s information and make it universally accessible and useful. With a bold 
and responsible approach, we continue to take the next steps to make this technology even more helpful for everyone.
Deliver the Most Advanced, Safe, and Responsible AI
We aim to build the most advanced, safe, and responsible AI with models that are developed, trained, and 
rigorously tested at scale powered by our continued investment in AI technical infrastructure. In December 2023, we 
launched Gemini, our most capable and general model. It was built from the ground up to be multimodal, which means 
it can generalize and seamlessly understand, operate across, and combine different types of information, including 
text, code, audio, images, and video. Our teams across Alphabet will leverage Gemini, as well as other AI models we 
have previously developed and announced, across our business to deliver the best product and service experience s 
for our use rs, advertisers, partners, customers, and developers.
We believe our approach to AI must be both bold and responsible. That means developing AI in a way that 
maximizes the positive benefits to society while addressing the challenges, guided by our AI P rinciples.  We published 
these in 2018, as one of the first companies to articulate principles that put beneficial use, users, safety, and avoidance 
of harms above business considerations. While there is natural tension between being bold and being responsible, we 
believe it is possible — and in fact critical — to embrace that tension productively.
Enable Organizations and Developers to Innovate on Google Cloud
AI is not only a powerful enabler, it is also a major platform shift. Globally, businesses from startups to large 
enterprises, and the public sector are thinking about how to drive transformation. That is why we are focused on 
making it easy and scalable for others to innovate, and grow, with AI. That means providing the most advanced 
computing infrastructure and expanding access to Google’s latest AI models that have been rigorously tested in our 
own products. Our Vertex AI platform gives developers the ability to train, tune, augment, and deploy applications using 
generative AI models and services such as Enterprise Search and Conversations. Duet AI for Google Cloud provides 
pre-packaged AI agents that assist developers to write, test, document, and operate software.
Improve Knowledge, Learning, Creativity, and Productivity
Things that we now consider routine – like spell check, mobile check deposit, or Google Search, Google 
Translate, and Google Maps – all use AI. As AI continues to improve rapidly, we are focused on giving helpful features 
to our users as we continue to deliver on our mission to organize the world’s information and make it universally 
accessible and useful.
While we have been integrating AI into our products for years, we are now embedding the power of generative AI 
to continue helping our users express themselves and get things done. For example, Duet AI in Google Workspace 
helps users write, organize, visualize, accelerate workflows, and have richer meetings. Bard allows users to 
collaborate with experimental AI with new features that include image capabilities, coding support, and app integration. 
Dream Screen, a new experimental feature in YouTube, allows for the creation of AI-generated video or image 
backgrounds to Shorts by typing an idea into a prompt.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
5.  We also know businesses of all sizes around the world rely on Google Ads to find customers and grow their 
businesses — and we make that even easier with AI. With Performance Max, advertisers simply tell us their campaign 
goals and share their creative assets, and AI will automatically produce and run a highly effective ad campaign across 
all of Google’s properties, to meet their budget. Product Studio brings the benefits of AI to businesses of all sizes, 
helping them easily create uniquely-tailored imagery featuring their products — for free. Additionally, we are 
experimenting with Search and Shopping ads that are directly integrated into the AI-powered snapshot and 
conversational mode in Search Generative Experience.
Build the Most Helpful Personal Computing Platforms and Devices
Over the years, our Pixel phones have incorporated AI compute directly into the device and built experiences on 
top of it. Our latest Pixel devices were built around AI, bringing the best AI-assistive experiences to our users, such as 
Best Take, Magic Editor, and Audio Magic Eraser. As we look ahead, we are designing our Android and Chrome 
operating systems with new AI-forward user experiences. 
Moonshots
Many companies get comfortable doing what they have always done, making only incremental changes. This 
incrementalism leads to irrelevance over time, especially in technology, where change tends to be revolutionary, not 
evolutionary. People thought we were crazy when we acquired YouTube and Android and when we launched Chrome, 
but those efforts have matured into major platforms for digital video and mobile devices and a safer, popular browser. 
Our early investments in AI started out as moonshots but are now incorporated into our core products and central to 
future developments. We continue to look toward the future and to invest for the long term , most notably for the 
application of AI to our  products and services , as well as other frontier technolog ies such as quantum computing . As 
we said in the original founders' letter, we will not shy away from high-risk, high-reward projects that we believe in, as 
they are the key to our long-term success.
Privacy and Security
We make it a priority to protect the privacy and security of our products, users, and customers, even if there are 
near-term financial consequences. We do this by continuously investing in building products that are secure by default; 
strictly upholding responsible data practices that emphasize privacy by design; and building easy-to-use settings that 
put people in control. We are continually enhancing these efforts over time, whether by enabling users to auto-delete 
their data, giving them tools, such as My Ad Center, to control their ad experience, or advancing anti-malware, anti-
phishing, and password security features.
Google
For reporting purposes Google comprises two segments: Google Services and Google Cloud.
Google Services
Serving Our Users
We have always been committed to building helpful products that can improve the lives of millions of people 
worldwide. Our product innovations are what make our services widely used, and our brand one of the most 
recognized in the world. Google Services' core products and platforms include  ads, Android, Chrome, devices, Gmail, 
Google Drive, Google Maps, Google Photos, Google Play, Search, and YouTube , with broad and growing adoption by 
users around the world.
Our products and services have come a long way since the company was founded more than 25 years ago. 
While Google Search started as a way to find web pages, organized into ten blue links, we have driven technical 
advancements and product innovations that have transformed Google Search into a dynamic, multimodal experience. 
We first expanded from traditional desktop browsers into mobile web search, making it easier to navigate on smaller 
screens. As new types of content surfaced on the internet, Universal Search made it possible to search multiple 
content types, like news, images, videos, and more, to deliver rich, relevant results. The introduction of new search 
modalities, like voice and visual search, made it easier for people to express their curiosity in natural and intuitive 
ways. We took that a step further with multisearch, which lets people search with text and images at the same time. 
Large language models like BERT and Multitask Unified Models, or MUMs, have made it possible to express more 
natural language queries, vastly improving the quality of results. Each advancement has made it easier and more 
natural for people to find what they are looking for.
This drive to make information more accessible and helpful has led us over the years to improve the discovery 
and creation of digital content both on the web and through platforms like Google Play and YouTube. People are 
consuming many forms of digital content, including watching  videos, streaming TV , playing games, listening to music, Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
6.  reading books, and using apps. Working with content creators and partners, we continue to build new ways for people 
around the w orld to  create and find gr eat digital content.
Fueling all of these great digital experiences are extraordinary platforms and devices. That is why we continue to 
invest in platforms like our Android mobile operating system, Chrome browser, and Chrome operating system, as well 
as growing our family of devices. We see tremendous potential for devices to be helpful and make people's lives easier 
by combining the best of our AI, software, and hardware. This potential is reflected in our latest generation of devices, 
such as the new Pixel 8 and Pixel 8 Pro, and the Pixel Watch 2. Creating products and services that people rely on 
every day is a journey that we are investing in for the long-term.
How We Make Money
We have built world-class advertising technologies for advertisers, agencies, and publishers to power their digital 
marketing businesses. Our advertising solutions help millions of companies grow their businesses through our wide 
range of products across devices and formats, and we aim to ensure positive user experiences by serving the right ads 
at the right time and by building deep partnerships with brands and agencies. AI has been foundational to our 
advertising business for more than a decade. Products like Performance Max and Product Studio use the full power of 
our AI to help advertisers find untapped and incremental conversion opportunities.
Google Services generates revenues primarily by delivering both performance and brand advertising that appears 
on Google Search & other properties, YouTube, and Google Network partners' properties ("Google Network 
properties"). We continue to invest in both performance and brand advertising and seek to improve the measurability of 
advertising so advertisers understand the effectiveness of their campaigns.
•Performance advertising  creates and delivers relevant ads that users will click on leading to direct 
engagement with advertisers. Performance advertising lets our advertisers connect with users while driving 
measurable results. Our ads tools allow performance advertisers to create simple text-based ads.
•Brand advertising  helps enhance users' awareness of and affinity for advertisers' products and services, 
through videos, text, images, and other interactive ads that run across various devices. We help brand 
advertisers deliver digital videos and other types of ads to specific audiences for their brand-building marketing 
campaigns. 
We have allocated substantial resources to stopping bad advertising practices and protecting users on the web. 
We focus on creating the best advertising experiences for our users and advertisers in many ways, including filtering 
out invalid traffic, removing billions of bad ads from our systems every year, and closely monitoring the sites, apps, and 
videos where ads appear and blocklisting them when necessary to ensure that ads do not fund bad content.
In addition, Google S ervices increasingly generates revenues from products and services beyond advertising, 
including:
•consumer subscriptions, which primarily include revenues from YouTube  services , such as YouTube TV, 
YouTube Music and Premium ,  and NFL Sunday Ticket, as well as Google One;
•platforms , which  primarily include  revenues from Google Play from the sales of apps and in-app purchases; 
and
•device s, which  primar ily include sales of the Pixel family of device s.
Google Cloud
Through our Google Cloud Platform and Google Workspace offerings, Google Cloud generates revenues 
primarily from consumption-based fees and subscriptions for infrastructure, platform, collaboration tools and other 
cloud services. Customers use five key capabilities from Google Cloud.
•AI-optimized Infrastructure:  provides open, reliable, and scalable compute, networking, and storage to 
enable customers to run workloads anywhere — on our Cloud, at the edge, or in their data centers. It can be 
used to migrate and modernize IT systems and to train and serve various types of AI models. 
•Cybersecurity:  helps customers detect, protect, and respond to a broad range of cybersecurity threats, with 
AI integrated to further strengthen  security outcomes, prioritize which threats to investigate, and identify attack 
paths, as well as accelerate resolution of cybersecurity threats. 
•Databases and Analytics:  provides a variety of different types of databases — relational, key-value, in-
memory — to store and manage data for different types of applications. Our Data Cloud also unifies data 
lakes, data warehouses, data governance, and advanced machine learning into a single platform that can 
analyze data across any cloud.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
7.  •Collaboration Tools:  Google Workspace and Duet AI in Google Workspace provide easy-to-use, secure 
communication and collaboration tools, including apps like Gmail, Docs, Drive, Calendar, Meet, and more. 
These tools enable secure hybrid and remote work, boosting productivity and collaboration. AI has been used 
in Google Workspace for years to improve grammar, efficiency, security, and more with features like Smart 
Reply, Smart Compose, and malware and phishing protection in Gmail.  Duet AI in Google Workspace helps 
users write, organize, visualize, accelerate workflows, and have richer meetings.
•AI Platform and Duet AI for Google Cloud:  Our Vertex AI platform gives developers the ability to train, tune, 
augment, and deploy applications using generative AI models and services such as Enterprise Search and 
Conversations. Duet AI for Google Cloud provides pre-packaged AI agents that assist developers to write, test, 
document, and operate software.
Other Bets
 Across Alphabet, we are also using technology to try to solve big problems that affect a wide variety of industries 
from improving transportation and health technology to exploring solutions to address climate change. Alphabet’s 
investment in the portfolio of Other Bets includes businesses that are at various stages of development, ranging from 
those in the R&D phase to those that are in the beginning stages of commercialization. Our goal is for them to become 
thriving, successful businesses. Other Bets operate as independent companies and some of them have their own 
boards with independent members and outside investors. While these early-stage businesses naturally come with 
considerable uncertainty, s ome of them are already generating revenue and making important strides in their 
industries.  Revenues from Other Bets are generated primarily from the sale of healthcare-related services and internet 
services.
Competition
Our business is characterized by rapid change as well as new and disruptive technologies. We face formidable 
competition in every aspect of our business, including, among others, from:
•general purpose search engines and information services;
•vertical search engines and e-commerce providers for queries related to travel, jobs, and health, which users 
may navigate directly to rather than go through Google;
•online advertising platforms and networks;
•other forms of advertising, such as billboards, magazines, newspapers, radio, and television as our advertisers 
typically advertise in multiple media, both online and offline;
•digital content and application platform providers;
•providers of enterprise cloud services;
•developers  and providers of AI products and services ;
•companies that design, manufacture, and market consumer hardware products, including businesses that 
have developed proprietary platforms;
•providers of digital video services; 
•social networks, which users may rely on for product or service referrals, rather than seeking information 
through traditional search engines;
•providers of workspace communication and connectivity products; and 
•digital assistant providers .
Competing successfully depends heavily on our ability to develop and distribute innovative products and 
technologies to the marketplace across our businesses. For example, for advertising, competing successfully depends 
on attracting and retaining:
•users, for whom other products and services are literally one click away, largely on the basis of the relevance 
of our advertising, as well as the general usefulness, security, and availability of our products and services;
•advertisers, primarily based on our ability to generate sales leads, and ultimately customers, and to deliver 
their advertisements in an efficient and effective manner across a variety of distribution channels; and
•content providers, primarily based on the quality of our advertiser base, our ability to help these partners 
generate revenues from advertising, and the terms of our agreements with them.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
8.  For additional information about competition, see Item 1A Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. 
Ongoing Commitment to Sustainability
We believe that every business has the opportunity and obligation to protect our planet. Sustainability is one of 
our core values at Google, and we strive to build sustainability into everything we do. We have been a leader on 
sustainability and climate change since Google’s founding more than 25 years ago. 
Our sustainability work is focused on empowering individuals to take action, working together with our partners 
and customers, and working to reduce  our carbon footprint across our operations and supply chain .
In 2020, we shared our aspiration to help individuals, cities, and other partners collectively reduce one gigaton of 
their carbon equivalent emissions annually by 2030. This is an ambitious vision that we have set to push us to 
contribute meaningfully to helping with climate solutions beyond our own operations and value chain.  
In 2021, we set an ambitious goal to achieve net-zero emissions across all of our operations and value chain, by 
2030. To accomplish this, we aim to reduce 50% of our combined Scope 1, Scope 2 (market-based), and Scope 3 
absolute emissions (versus our 2019 baseline) before 2030, and plan to invest in nature-based and technology-based 
carbon removal solutions to neutralize our remaining emissions. We have formally committed to the Science Based 
Targets initiative to seek their validation of our absolute emissions reduction  target. 
One of the key levers for reducing emissions from our operations is transitioning to clean energy.  Since 2017, we 
have matched 100% of the electricity consumption of our global operations with purchases of renewable energy on an 
annual basis. However, because of differences in the availability of renewable energy sources like solar and wind 
across the regions where we operate—and because of the variable supply of these resources—we still need to rely on 
carbon-emitting energy sources that power local grids. That is why we set a goal to run on 24/7 carbon-free energy 
(CFE) on every grid where we operate by 2030.
Achieving net-zero emissions and 24/7 CFE by 2030 are extremely ambitious goals. We also know that our path 
to net-zero emissions w ill not be easy or linear. Some of our plans may take years to deliver results, particularly where 
they involve building new large-scale infrastructure with long lead times. So as our business continues to evolve, we 
expect our emissions to rise before dropping towards our absolute emissions reduction target.
To benefit the people and places where we operate, we have set goals to replenish 120% of the freshwater 
volume we consume, on average, across our offices and data centers by 2030 and to help restore and improve the 
quality of water and health of ecosystems in the communities where we operate. 
We also aim to maximize the reuse of finite resources across our operations, products, and supply chains.  Our 
circularity principles focus on designing out waste from the start, keeping materials in use for as long as possible, and 
promoting healthy materials—for our data centers, workplaces, and products.
More information on our approach to sustainability can be found in our annual sustainability reports, including 
Google’s Environmental Report. The contents of our sustainability reports are not incorporated by reference into this 
Annual Report on Form 10-K or in any other report or document we file with the SEC. For additional information about 
risks and uncertainties applicable to our commitments to attain certain sustainability goals, see Item 1A Risk Factors of 
this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Culture and Workforce
We are a company of curious, talented, and passionate people. We embrace collaboration and creativity, and 
encourage the iteration of ideas to address complex challenges in technology and society.
Our people are critical for our continued success, so we work hard to create an environment where employees 
can have fulfilling careers, and be happy, healthy, and productive. We offer industry-leading benefits and programs to 
take care of the diverse needs of our employees and their families, including opportunities for career growth and 
development, resources to support their financial health, and access to excellent healthcare choices. Our competitive 
compensation programs help us to attract and retain top candidates, and we will continue to invest in recruiting 
talented people to technical and non-technical roles, and rewarding them well. We provide a variety of high quality 
training and support to managers to build and strengthen their capabilities-–ranging from courses for new managers, to 
learning resources that help them provide feedback and manage performance, to coaching and individual support.
At Alphabet, we are committed to making diversity, equity, and inclusion part of everything we do and to growing a 
workforce that is representative of the users we serve. More information on Google’s approach to diversity can be 
found in our annual diversity reports, available publicly at diversity.google. The contents of our diversity reports are not 
incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K or in any other report or document we file with the 
SEC.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
9.   As of December 31, 2023 , Alphabet had 182,502  employees. We have work councils and statutory employee 
representation obligations in certain countries, and we are committed to supporting protected labor rights, maintaining 
an open culture, and listening to all employees. Supporting healthy and open dialogue is central to how we work, and 
we communicate information about the company through multiple internal channels to our employees.
When necessary we contract with businesses around the world to provide specialized services where we do not 
have appropriate in-house expertise or resources, often in fields that require specialized training like cafe operations, 
content moderation, customer support, and physical security. We also contract with temporary staffing agencies when 
we need to cover short-term leaves, when we have spikes in business needs, or when we need to quickly incubate 
special projects. We choose our partners and staffing agencies carefully, and review their compliance with Google’s 
Supplier Code of Conduct. We continually make improvements to promote a respectful and positive working 
environment for everyone — employees, vendors, and temporary staff alike.
Government Regulation
We are subject to numerous United States (U.S.) federal, state, and local, as well as foreign laws and regulations 
covering a wide variety of subjects, and the scope of this coverage continues to broaden with continuing new legal and 
regulatory developments in the U.S. and internationally. Like other companies in the technology industry, we face 
increasingly heightened scrutiny from both U.S. and foreign governments with respect to our compliance with laws and 
regulations. Many of these laws and regulations are evolving and their applicability and scope, as interpreted by the 
courts, remain uncertain. Particularly  with regard to AI; climate change and sustainability; competition; consumer 
protection; content moderation; data privacy and security;  news publications; and reporting on human capital and 
diversity , we have seen an increase in new and evolving laws and regulations, as well as related enforcement actions 
and investigations, being proposed and implemented in recent years by legislative and regulatory bodies around the 
world.
Our compliance with these laws and regulations may be onerous and could, individually or in the aggregate, 
increase our cost of doing business, make our products and services less useful, limit our ability to pursue certain 
business models, cause us to change our business practices, affect our competitive position relative to our peers, and/
or otherwise harm our business, reputation, financial condition, and operating results.
For additional information about government regulation applicable to our business, see Item 1A Risk Factors; 
Trends in Our Business and Financial Effect in Part II, Item 7; and Legal Matters in Note 10  of the Notes to 
Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Intellectual Property
We rely on various intellectual property laws, confidentiality procedures and contractual provisions to protect our 
proprietary technology and our brand. We have registered, and applied for the registration of, U.S. and international 
trademarks, service marks, domain names, and copyrights. We have also filed patent applications in the U.S. and 
foreign countries covering certain of our technology, and acquired patent assets to supplement our portfolio. We have 
licensed in the past, and expect that we may license in the future, certain of our rights to other parties. For additional 
information, see Item 1A Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Available Information
Our website is located at www.abc.xyz, and our investor relations website is located at www.abc.xyz/investor. 
Access to our Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K, and our 
Proxy Statements, and any amendments to these reports, is available on our investor relations website, free of charge, 
after we file or furnish them with the SEC and they are available on the SEC's website at www.sec.gov.
We webcast via our investor relations website our earnings calls and certain events we participate in or host with 
members of the investment community. Our investor relations website also provides notifications of news or 
announcements regarding our financial performance and other items that may be material or of interest to our 
investors, including SEC filings, investor events, press and earnings releases, and blogs. We also share Google news 
and product updates on Google's Keyword blog at https://www.blog.google/, which may be of interest or material to our 
investors. Further, corporate governance information, including our certificate of incorporation, bylaws, governance 
guidelines, board committee charters, and code of conduct, is also available on our investor relations website under 
the heading "Governance." The content of our websites are not incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on 
Form 10-K or in any other report or document we file with the SEC, and any references to our websites are intended to 
be inactive textual references only.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
10.  ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS
Our operations and financial results are subject to various risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to 
those described below, which could harm our business, reputation, financial condition, and operating results, and affect 
the trading price of our Class A and Class C stock.
Risks Specific to our Company
We generate a significant portion of our revenues from advertising. Reduced spending by advertisers, a 
loss of partners, or new and existing technologies that block ads online and/or affect our ability to customize 
ads could harm our business. 
We generated more than 75% of total  revenues from online advertising in 2023. Many of our advertisers, 
companies that distribute our products and services, digital publishers, and content providers can terminate their 
contracts with us at any time. These partners may not continue to do business with us if we do not create more value 
(such as increased numbers of users or customers, new sales leads, increased brand awareness, or more effective 
monetization) than their available alternatives. Changes to our advertising policies and data privacy practice s, such as 
our initiatives to phase out third-party cookies,  as well as changes to other companies’ advertising and/or data privacy 
practices have in the past, and may in the future, affect the advertising that we are able to provide. In addition, 
technologies have been developed that make customized ads more difficult, or that block the display of ads altogether, 
and some providers of online services have integrated these technologies that could potentially impair the availability 
and functionality of third-party digital advertising. Failing to provide superior value or deliver advertisements effectively 
and competitively could harm our business, reputation, financial condition, and operating results. 
In addition, expenditures by advertisers tend to correlate with overall economic conditions. Adverse 
macroeconomic conditions have affected, and may in the future affect, the demand for advertising, resulting in 
fluctuations in the amounts our advertisers spend on advertising, which could harm our financial condition and 
operating results. 
We face intense competition. If we do not continue to innovate and provide products and services that 
are useful to users, customers, and other partners, we may not remain competitive, which could harm our 
business, financial condition, and operating results. 
Our business environment is rapidly evolving and intensely competitive. Our businesses face changing 
technologies, shifting user needs, and frequent introductions of rival products and services. To compete successfully, 
we must accurately anticipate technology developments and deliver innovative, relevant and useful products, services, 
and technologies in a timely manner. As our businesses evolve, the competitive pressure to innovate will encompass a 
wider range of products and services. We must continue to invest significant resources in technical infrastructure and 
R&D, including through acquisitions, in order to enhance our technology, products , and services . 
We have many competitors in different industries. Our current and potential domestic and international 
competitors range from large and established companies to emerging start-ups. Some competitors have longer 
operating histories and well-established relationships in various sectors. They can use their experience and resources 
in ways that could affect our competitive position, including by making acquisitions  and entering into other strategic 
arrangements ; continuing to invest heavily in technical infrastructure, R&D, and in talent;  initiating intellectual property 
and competition claims (whether or not meritorious); and continuing to compete for users, advertisers, customers, and 
content providers. Further, discrepancies in enforcement of existing laws may enable our lesser known competitors to 
aggressively interpret those laws without commensurate scrutiny, thereby affording them competitive advantages. Our 
competitors may also be able to innovate and provide products and services faster than we can or may foresee the 
need for products and services before we do. 
We are expanding our investment in AI across the entire company . This includes generative AI and continuing to 
integrate AI capabilities into our products and services. AI technology and services are highly competitive, rapidly 
evolving, and require significant investment, including development and operational costs, to meet the changing needs 
and expectations of our existing users and attract new users. Our ability to deploy certain AI technologies critical for 
our products and services and for our business strategy may depend on the availability and pricing of third-party 
equipment and technical infrastructure. Additionally, other companies may develop AI products and technologies that 
are similar or superior to our technologies or more cost-effective to deploy. Other companies may also have (or in the 
future may obtain) patents or other proprietary rights that would prevent, limit, or interfere with our ability to make, use, 
or sell our own AI products and services.
Our financial condition and operating results may also suffer if our products and services are not responsive to the 
evolving needs and desires of our users, advertisers, publishers, customers, and content providers. As new and 
existing technologies continue to develop, competitors and new entrants may be able to offer experiences that are, or Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
11.  that are seen to be, substantially similar to or better than ours. These technologies could reduce usage of our products 
and services, and force us to compete in different ways and expend significant resources to develop and operate equal 
or better products and services. Competitors’ success in providing compelling products and services or in attracting 
and retaining users, advertisers, publishers, customers, and content providers could harm our financial condition and 
operating results. 
Our ongoing investment in new businesses, products, services, and technologies  is inherently risky, and 
could divert management attention and harm our business, financial condition, and operating results. 
We have invested and expect to continue to invest in new businesses, products, services,  and technologies in a 
wide range of industries beyond online advertising. The investments that we are making across our businesses, such 
as building AI capabilities into new and existing products and services , reflect our ongoing efforts to innovate and 
provide products and services that are helpful to users, advertisers, publishers, customers, and content providers . Our 
investments ultimately  may not be commercially viable or may not result in an adequate return of capital and, in 
pursuing new strategies, we may incur unanticipated liabilities. Innovations in our products and services could also 
result in changes to user behavior and affect our revenue trends. These endeavors involve significant risks and 
uncertainties, including diversion of resources and management attention from current operations, different 
monetization models, and the use of alternative investment, governance, or compensation structures that may fail to 
adequately align incentives across the company or otherwise accomplish their objectives.
Within Google Services , we continue to invest heavily in devices , including our smartphones, home devices,  and 
wearables, which is a highly competitive market  with frequent introduction of new products and services, rapid 
adoption of technological advancements by competitors, increased market saturation in developed countries, short 
product life cycles, evolving industry standards, continual improvement in performance characteristics, and price and 
feature sensitivity on the part of consumers and businesses.  There can be no assurance we will be able to provide 
devices  that compete  effectively. 
Within Google Cloud , we devote significant resources to develop and deploy our enterprise-ready cloud services, 
including Google Cloud Platform and Google Workspace, and we are advancing our AI platforms and models to 
support these tools and technologies. We are incurring costs to build and maintain infrastructure to support cloud 
computing services, invest in cybersecurity, and hire talent, particularly to support and scale our sales force. At the 
same time, our competitors are rapidly developing and deploying cloud-based services. Pricing and delivery models 
are competitive and constantly evolving, and we may not attain sufficient scale and profitability to achieve our business 
objectives. Further, our business with public sector customers may present additional risks, including regulatory 
compliance risks. For instance, we may be subject to government audits and cost reviews, and any failure to comply or 
any deficiencies found may expose us to legal, financial, and/or reputational risks. Evolving laws and regulations may 
require us to make new capital investments, build new products, and seek partners to deliver localized services in 
other countries, and we may not be able to meet sovereign operating requirements. 
Within Other Bets, we are investing significantly in the areas of health, life sciences, and transportation, among 
others. These investment areas face intense competition from large, experienced, and well-funded competitors, and 
our offerings, many of which involve the development of new and emerging technologies, may not be successful, or be 
able to compete effectively or operate at sufficient levels of profitability. 
In addition, new and evolving products and services, including those that use AI, raise ethical, technological, 
legal, regulatory, and other challenges, which may negatively affect our brands and demand for our products and 
services. Because all of these investment areas are inherently risky, no assurance can be given that such strategies 
and offerings will be successful or will not harm our reputation, financial condition, and operating results. 
Our revenue growth rate could decline over time , and we may experience  downward pressure on our 
operating margin in the future. 
Our revenue growth rate  could decline over time as a result of a number of factors, including changes in the 
devices and modalities used to access our products and services; changes in geographic mix; deceleration or declines 
in advertiser spending; competition; customer usage and demand for our products; decreases in our pricing of our 
products and services; ongoing product and policy changes; and shifts to lower priced products and services.  
In addition, we may experience downward pressure on our operating margin resulting from a variety of factors, 
such as an increase in the mix of lower-margin products and services, in particular from the continued expansion of our 
business into new fields, including products and services such as our devices , Google Cloud, and consumer  
subscription products, as well as significant investments in Other Bets, all of which may have margins lower than those 
we generate from advertising. In particular, margins on our device s have had, and may continue to have, an adverse 
effect on our consolidated margins due to pressures on pricing and higher cost of sales. We may also experience Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
12.  downward pressure on our operating margins from increasing regulations, increasing competition, and increasing costs 
for many aspects of our business. Further, certain of our costs and expenses are generally less variable in nature and 
may not correlate to changes in revenue. W e may  also not be able to execute our efforts to re-engineer our cost base 
successfully or in a timely manner. Due to these factors and the evolving nature of our business, our historical revenue 
growth rate and historical operating margin may not be indicative of our future performance. For additional information, 
see Trends in Our Business and Financial Effect and Revenues and Monetization Metrics in Part II, Item 7 of this 
Annual Report on Form 10-K. 
Our intellectual property rights are valuable, and any inability to protect them could reduce the value of 
our products, services, and brands as well as affect our ability to compete. 
Our patents, trademarks, trade secrets, copyrights, and other intellectual property rights are important assets for 
us. Various events outside of our control pose a threat to our intellectual property rights, as well as to our products, 
services, and technologies. For example, effective intellectual property protection may not be available in every country 
in which our products and services are distributed or made available through the Internet. Also, the efforts we have 
taken to protect our proprietary rights may not be sufficient or effective. Although we seek to obtain patent protection 
for our innovations, it is possible we may not be able to protect some of these innovations. Moreover, we may not have 
adequate patent or copyright protection for certain innovations that later turn out to be important. There is always the 
possibility that the scope of the protection gained will be insufficient or that an issued patent may be deemed invalid or 
unenforceable. 
We also seek to maintain certain intellectual property as trade secrets. The secrecy of such trade secrets and 
other sensitive information could be compromised, which could cause us to lose the competitive advantage resulting 
from these trade secrets. We also face risks associated with our trademarks. For example, there is a risk that the word 
“Google” could become so commonly used that it becomes synonymous with the word “search.” Some courts have 
ruled that "Google" is a protectable trademark, but it is possible that other courts, particularly those outside of the U.S., 
may reach a different determination. If this happens, we could lose protection for this trademark, which could result in 
other people using the word “Google” to refer to their own products, thus diminishing our brand. 
Any significant impairment of our intellectual property rights could harm our business and our ability to compete. 
Also, protecting our intellectual property rights is costly and time consuming. Any increase in the unauthorized use of 
our intellectual property could make it more expensive to do business and harm our financial condition and operating 
results. 
Our business depends on strong brands, and failing to maintain and enhance our brands would hurt our 
ability to expand our base of users, advertisers, customers, content providers, and other partners. 
Our strong brands have significantly contributed to the success of our business. Maintaining and enhancing the 
brands within Google Service s, Google Cloud, and Other Bets increases our ability to enter new categories and launch 
new and innovative products and services that better serve the needs of our users, advertisers, customers, content 
providers, and other partners. Our brands have been, and may in the future be, negatively affected by a number of 
factors, including, among others, reputational issues, third-party content shared on our platforms, data privacy and 
security issues and developments, and product or technical performance failures.  For example, if we fail to respond 
appropriately to the sharing of misinformation or objectionable content on our services and/or products or objectionable 
practices by advertisers, or otherwise to adequately address user concerns, our users may lose confidence in our 
brands. 
Furthermore, failure to maintain and enhance our brands could harm our business, reputation, financial condition, 
and operating results. Our success will depend largely on our ability to remain a technology leader and continue to 
provide high-quality, trustworthy, innovative products and services that are truly useful and play a valuable role in a 
range of settings. 
We face a number of manufacturing and supply chain risks that could harm our business, financial 
condition, and operating results. 
We face a number of risks related to manufacturing and supply chain management, which could affect our ability 
to supply both our products and our services. 
We rely on contract manufacturers to manufacture or assemble our device s and servers and networking 
equipment used in our technical infrastructure, and we may supply the contract manufacturers with components to 
assemble t he device s and equipment. We also rely on other companies to participate in the  supply of components and  
distribution of our products and services. Our business could be negatively affected if we are not able to engage these 
companies with the necessary capabilities or capacity on reasonable terms, or if those we engage fail to meet their Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
13.  obligations (whether due to financial difficulties or other reasons), or make adverse changes in the pricing or other 
material terms of our arrangements with them. 
We have experienced and/or may in the future experience supply shortages, price increases, quality issues, and/
or longer lead times that could negatively affect our operations, driven by raw material, component availability, 
manufacturing capacity, labor shortages, industry allocations, logistics capacity, inflation, foreign currency exchange 
rates, tariffs, sanctions and export controls, trade disputes and barriers, forced labor concerns, sustainability sourcing 
requirements, geopolitical tensions, armed conflicts, natural disasters or pandemics, the effects of climate change 
(such as sea level rise, drought, flooding, heat waves, wildfires and resultant air quality effects and power shutdowns  
associated with wildfire prevention, and increased storm severity), power loss, and significant changes in the financial 
or business condition of our suppliers. Some of the components we use in our technical infrastructure and our device s 
are available from only one or limited sources, and we may not be able to find replacement vendors on favorable terms 
in the event of a supply chain disruption. A significant supply interruption that affects us or our vendors could delay 
critical data center upgrades or expansions and delay consumer product availability . 
We may enter into long-term contracts for materials and products that commit us to significant terms and 
conditions. We may face costs for materials and products that are not consumed due to market demand, technological 
change, changed consumer preferences, quality, product recalls, and warranty issues. For instance, because certain of 
our hardware  supply contracts have volume-based pricing or minimum purchase requirements, if the volume of sales 
of our devices decreases or does not reach projected targets, we could face increased materials and manufacturing 
costs or other financial liabilities that could make our products more costly per unit to manufacture and harm our 
financial condition and operating results. Furthermore, certain of our competitors may negotiate more favorable 
contractual terms based on volume and other commitments that may provide them with competitive advantages and 
may affect our supply. 
Our device s have had, and in the future may have, quality issues resulting from design, manufacturing, or 
operations. Sometimes, these issues may be caused by components we purchase from other manufacturers or 
suppliers. If the quality of our products and services does not meet expectations or our products or services are 
defective or require a recall, it could harm our reputation, financial condition, and operating results.  
We require our suppliers and business partners to comply with laws and, where applicable, our company policies 
and practices, such as the Google Supplier Code of Conduct, regarding workplace and employment practices, data 
security, environmental compliance, and intellectual property licensing, but we do not control them or their practices. 
Violations of law or unethical business practices could result in supply chain disruptions, canceled orders, harm to key 
relationships, and damage to our reputation. Their failure to procure necessary license rights to intellectual property 
could affect our ability to sell our products or services and expose us to litigation or financial claims. 
Interruption to, interference with, or failure of our complex information technology and communications 
systems could hurt our ability to effectively provide our products and services, which could harm  our 
reputation, financial condition, and operating results. 
The availability of our products and services and fulfillment of our customer contracts depend on the continuing 
operation of our information technology and communications systems. Our systems are vulnerable to damage, 
interference, or interruption from modifications or upgrades, terrorist attacks, state-sponsored attacks, natural disasters 
or pandemics, geopolitical tensions or armed conflicts, export controls and sanctions, the effects of climate change 
(such as sea level rise, drought, flooding, heat waves, wildfires and resultant air quality effects and power shutdowns  
associated with wildfire prevention, and increased storm severity), power loss, utility outages, telecommunications 
failures, computer viruses, software bugs, ransomware attacks, supply-chain attacks, computer denial of service 
attacks, phishing schemes, or other attempts to harm or access our systems. Some of our data centers are located in 
areas with a high risk of major earthquakes or other natural disasters. Our data centers are also subject to break-ins, 
sabotage, and intentional acts of vandalism, and, in some cases, to potential disruptions resulting from problems 
experienced by facility operators or disruptions as a result of geopolitical tensions and conflicts happening in the area. 
Some of our systems are not fully redundant, and disaster recovery planning cannot account for all eventualities. The 
occurrence of a natural disaster or pandemic, closure of a facility, or other unanticipated problems affecting our data 
centers could result in lengthy interruptions in our service. In addition, our products and services are highly technical 
and complex and have contained in the past, and may contain in the future, errors or vulnerabilities, which could result 
in interruptions in or failure of our services or systems. Any of these incidents could impede or prevent us from 
effectively offering products and providing services, which could harm our reputation, financial condition, and operating 
results. 
Our international operations expose us to additional risks that could harm our business, financial 
condition, and operating results.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
14.  Our international operations are significant to our revenues and net income, and we plan to continue to grow 
internationally. International revenues accounted for approximately 53% of our consolidated revenues in 2023. In 
addition to risks described elsewhere in this section, our international operations expose us to other risks, including the 
following:
•restrictions on foreign ownership and investments, and stringent foreign exchange controls that might prevent 
us from repatriating cash earned in countries outside the U.S.;
•sanctions, import and export controls, other market access barriers, political unrest, geopolitical tensions, 
changes in regimes, or armed conflict (such as ongoing conflicts in the Middle East and Ukraine), any of which 
may affect our business continuity, increase our operating costs, limit demand for our products and services, 
limit our ability to source components or final products, or prevent or impede us from  operating in certain 
jurisdictions , complying with local laws, or offering products or services;
•longer payment cycles in some countries, increased credit risk, and higher levels of payment fraud;
•an evolving foreign policy landscape that may adversely affect our revenues and could subject us to litigation, 
new regulatory costs and challenges (including new customer requirements), uncertainty regarding regulatory 
outcomes, and other liabilities under local laws that may not offer due process or clear legal precedent;
•anti-corruption laws, such as the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, and other local laws prohibiting certain 
payments to government officials, violations of which could result in civil and criminal penalties; and
•different employee/employer relationships, existence of works councils and differing labor practices, and other 
challenges caused by distance, language, local expertise, and cultural differences, increasing the complexity 
of doing business in multiple jurisdictions.
Because we conduct business in currencies other than U.S. dollars but report our financial results in U.S. dollars, 
we have faced, and will continue to face, exposure to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. Although we 
hedge a portion of our international currency exposure, significant fluctuations in exchange rates between the U.S. 
dollar and foreign currencies  have in the past and may in the future adversely affect our revenues and earnings. 
Hedging programs are also inherently risky and could expose us to additional risks that could harm our financial 
condition and operating results. 
We are exposed to fluctuations in the fair values of our investments and, in some instances, our financial 
statements incorporate inherently subjective valuation methodologies. 
The fair value of our debt and equity investments may in the future be, and certain investments have been in the 
past, negatively affected by liquidity, credit deterioration or losses, performance and financial results of the underlying 
entities, foreign exchange rates, changes in interest rates, including changes that may result from the implementation 
of new benchmark rates, the effect of new or changing regulations, the stock market in general, or other factors. 
We measure certain of our non-marketable equity and debt securities, certain other instruments including stock-
based compensation awards settled in the stock of  Other Bet  companies, and certain assets and liabilities acquired in 
a business combination, at fair value on a nonrecurring basis, which is inherently subjective and requires management 
judgment and estimation. All gains and losses on non-marketable equity securities are recognized in OI&E, which 
increases the volatility of our OI&E. The unrealized gains and losse s or impairments we record from fair value 
remeasurements in any particular period may differ significantly from the gains or losses we ultimately realize on such 
investments.  
As a res ult of these factors, the value of our investments could decline, which could harm our financial condition 
and operating results. 
Risks Related to our Industry 
People access our products and services through a variety of platforms and devices that continue to 
evolve with the advancement of technology and user preferences. If manufacturers and users do not widely 
adopt versions of our products and services developed for these interfaces, our business could be harmed. 
People access our products and services through a growing variety of devices such as desktop computers, 
mobile phones, smartphones, laptops and tablets, video game consoles, voice-activated speakers, wearables 
(including virtual reality and augmented reality devices), automobiles, and television-streaming devices. Our products 
and services may be less popular on some interfaces. Each manufacturer or distributor may establish unique technical 
standards for its devices, and our products and services may not be available or may only be available with limited 
functionality for our users or our advertisers on these devices as a result. Some manufacturers may also elect not to 
include our products on their devices. In addition, search queries may be undertaken via voice-activated search, apps, Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
15.  social media or other platforms, which could harm our business. It is hard to predict the challenges we may encounter 
in adapting our products and services and developing competitive new products and services. We expect to continue 
to devote significant resources to creating and supporting products and services across multiple platforms and devices. 
Failing to attract and retain a substantial number of new device manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, developers, and 
users, or failing to develop products and technologies that work well on new devices and platforms, could harm our 
business, financial condition, and operating results and ability to capture future business opportunities. 
Issues in the development and use of AI may result in reputational harm and increased liability exposure. 
Our evolving AI-related efforts may give rise to risks related to harmful content, inaccuracies, discrimination, 
intellectual property infringement or misappropriation, defamation, data privacy, cybersecurity, and other issues . As a 
result of these and other challenges associated with innovative technologies, our implementation of AI systems could 
subject us to competitive harm, regulatory action, legal liability (including under new and proposed legislation and 
regulations), new applications of existing data protection, privacy, intellectual property, and other laws, and brand or 
reputational harm. 
Some uses of AI will present ethical issues and may have broad effects on society. In order to implement A I 
responsibly and minimize unintended harmful effects, we have already devoted and will continue to invest significant  
resources to develop, test, and maintain our products and services, but we may not be able to identify or resolve all AI-
related issues, deficiencies, and/or failures before they arise. Unintended consequences, uses, or customization of our 
AI tools and systems may negatively affect human rights, privacy, employment, or other social concerns, which may 
result in claims, lawsuits, brand or reputational harm, and increased regulatory scrutiny, any of which could harm our 
business, financial condition, and operating results.
Data privacy  and security concerns relating to our technology and our practices could harm our 
reputation, cause us to incur significant liability, and deter current and potential users or customers from 
using our products and services. Computer viruses, software bugs or defects, security breaches, and attacks 
on our systems could result in the improper disclosure and use of user data and interference with our users’ 
and customers’ ability to use our products and services, harming our business and reputation. 
Concerns about, including the adequacy of, our practices with regard to the collection, use, governance, 
disclosure, or security of personal data or other data-privacy-related matters, even if unfounded, could harm our 
business, reputation, financial condition, and operating results. Our policies and practices may change over time as 
expectations and regulations regarding privacy and data change. 
Our products and services involve the storage, handling, and transmission of proprietary and other sensitive 
information. Software bugs, theft, misuse, defects, vulnerabilities in our products and services, and security breaches 
expose us to a risk of loss or improper use and disclosure of such information, which could result in litigation and other 
potential liabilities, including regulatory fines and penalties, as well as reputational harm. Additionally, our products 
incorporate highly technical and complex technologies, and thus our technologies and software have contained, and 
are likely in the future to contain, undetected errors, bugs, and/or vulnerabilities. We continue to add new features 
involving AI to our offerings and internal systems, and features that rely on AI may be susceptible to unanticipated 
security threats as our and the market’s understanding of AI-centric security risks and protection methods continue to 
develop. We have in the past discovered, and may in the future discover, some errors in our software code only after 
we have released the code. Systems and control failures, security breaches, failure to comply with our privacy policies, 
and/or inadvertent disclosure of user data could result in government and legal exposure, seriously harm our 
reputation, brand, and business, and impair our ability to attract and retain users or customers. Such incidents have 
occurred in the past and may continue to occur due to the scale and nature of our products and services. While there 
is no guarantee that such incidents will not cause significant damage, we expect to continue to expend significant 
resources to maintain security protections that limit the effect of bugs, theft, misuse, and security vulnerabilities or 
breaches. 
We experience cyber attacks and other attempts to gain unauthorized access to our systems on a regular basis. 
Cyber attacks continue to evolve in sophistication and volume, and inherently may be difficult to detect for long periods 
of time. We have seen, and will continue to see, industry-wide software supply chain vulnerabilities, which could affect 
our or other parties’ systems. We expect to continue to experience such incidents or vulnerabilities in the future. Our 
efforts to address undesirable activity on our platform may also increase the risk of retaliatory attack. In addition, we 
face the risk of cyber attacks by nation-states and state-sponsored actors. These attacks may target us or our 
customers, particularly our public sector customers (including federal, state, and local governments). Geopolitical 
tensions or armed conflicts, such as the ongoing conflict in the Middle East and Ukraine , may increase these risks. 
We may experience security issues, whether due to employee or insider error or malfeasance, system errors, or 
vulnerabilities in our or other parties’ systems. While we may not determine some of these issues to be material at the Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
16.  time they occur and may remedy them quickly, there is no guarantee that these issues will not ultimately result in 
significant legal, financial, and reputational harm, including government inquiries, enforcement actions, litigation, and 
negative publicity. There is also no guarantee that a series of related issues may not be determined to be material at a 
later date in the aggregate, even if they may not be material individually at the time of their occurrence. Because the 
techniques used to obtain unauthorized access to, disable or degrade service provided by or otherwise sabotage 
systems change frequently and often are recognized only after being launched against a target, even taking all 
reasonable precautions, including those required by law, we have been unable in the past and may continue to be 
unable to anticipate or detect attacks or vulnerabilities or implement adequate preventative measures. 
Further, if any partners with whom we share user or other customer information fail to implement adequate data-
security practices, fail to comply with our terms and policies, or otherwise suffer a network or other security breach, our 
users’ data may be improperly accessed, used, or disclosed. If an actual or perceived breach of our or our business 
partners’ or service providers’ security occurs, the market perception of the effectiveness of our security measures 
would be harmed, we could lose users and customers, our trade secrets or those of our business partners may be 
compromised, and we may be exposed to significant legal and financial risks, including legal claims (which may 
include class-action litigation) and regulatory actions, fines, and penalties. Any of the foregoing consequences could 
harm our business, reputation, financial condition, and operating results. 
While we have dedicated significant resources to privacy and security incident response capabilities , including 
dedicated worldwide incident response teams, our response process, particularly during times of a natural disaster or 
pandemic, may not be adequate, may fail to accurately assess the severity of an incident, may not be fast enough to 
prevent or limit harm, or may fail to sufficiently remediate an incident. As a result, we may suffer significant legal, 
reputational, or financial exposure, which could harm our business, financial condition, and operating results. 
For additional information, see also our risk factor on privacy and data protection regulations under ‘Risks Related 
to Laws, Regulations, and Policies’ below.
Our ongoing investments in safety, security, and content review will likely continue to identify abuse of 
our platforms and misuse of user data. 
In addition to our efforts to prevent and mitigate cyber attacks, we are making significant investments in safety, 
security, and review efforts to combat misuse of our services and unauthorized access to user data by third parties, 
including investigation and review of platform applications that could access the information of users of our services. 
As a result of these efforts, we have in the past discovered, and may in the future discover, incidents of unnecessary 
access to or misuse of user data or other undesirable activity by third parties. However, we may not have discovered, 
and may in the future not discover, all such incidents or activity, whether as a result of our data limitations, including 
our lack of visibility over our encrypted services, the scale of activity on our platform, or other factors, including factors 
outside of our control such as a natural disaster or pandemic, and we may learn of such incidents or activity via third 
parties. Such incidents and activities may include the use of user data or our systems in a manner inconsistent with our 
terms, contracts or policies, the existence of false or undesirable user accounts, election interference, improper ad 
purchases, activities that threaten people’s safety on- or off-line, or instances of spamming, scraping, or spreading 
disinformation. While we may not determine some of these incidents to be material at the time they occurred and we 
may remedy them quickly, there is no guarantee that these issues will not ultimately result in significant legal, financial, 
and reputational harm, including government inquiries and enforcement actions, litigation, and negative publicity. There 
is also no guarantee that a series of related issues may not be determined to be material at a later date in the 
aggregate, even if they may not be material individually at the time of their occurrence. 
We may also be unsuccessful in our efforts to enforce our policies or otherwise prevent or remediate any such 
incidents. Any of the foregoing developments may negatively affect user trust and engagement, harm our reputation 
and brands, require us to change our business practices in ways that harm our business operations, and adversely 
affect our business and financial results. Any such developments may also subject us to additional litigation and 
regulatory inquiries, which could result in monetary penalties and damages, divert management’s time and attention, 
and lead to enhanced regulatory oversight. 
Problematic content on our platforms, including low-quality user-generated content, web spam, content 
farms, and other violations of our guidelines could affect the quality of our services, which could harm our 
reputation and deter our current and potential users from using our products and services. 
We, like others in the industry, face violations of our content guidelines across our platforms, including 
sophisticated attempts by bad actors to manipulate our hosting and advertising systems to fraudulently generate 
revenues, or to otherwise generate traffic that does not represent genuine user interest or intent. While we invest 
significantly in efforts to promote high-quality and relevant results and to detect and prevent low-quality content and 
invalid traffic, we have been unable and may continue to be unable to detect and prevent all such abuses or promote Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
17.  uniformly high-quality content. Increased use of AI in our offerings and internal systems may create new avenues of 
abuse for bad actors.
Many websites violate or attempt to violate our guidelines, including by seeking to inappropriately rank higher in 
search results than our search engine's assessment of their relevance and utility would rank them. Such efforts have 
affected, and may continue to affect, the quality of content on our platforms and lead them to display false, misleading, 
or undesirable content. Although English-language web spam in our search results has been reduced, and web spam 
in most other languages is limited, we expect web spammers will continue to seek inappropriate ways to improve their 
rankings. Although we continue to invest in and deploy proprietary technology to detect and prevent web spam on our 
platforms, there is no guarantee that our technology will always be successful, and our users may have negative 
experiences on our platforms if our technology fails to work as intended, which may affect our users' decisions in 
continuing to use our platforms. We also face other challenges from low-quality and irrelevant content websites, 
including content farms, which are websites that generate large quantities of low-quality content to help them improve 
their search rankings. We are continually launching algorithmic changes designed to detect and prevent abuse from 
low-quality websites, but we may not always be successful. We also face other challenges on our platforms, including 
violations of our content guidelines involving incidents such as attempted election interference, activities that threaten 
the safety and/or well-being of our users on- or off-line, and the spreading of misinformation or disinformation. 
If we fail to either detect and prevent an increase in problematic content or effectively promote high-quality 
content, it could hurt our reputation for delivering relevant information or reduce use of our platforms, harming our 
financial condition and operating results. It may also subject us to litigation and regulatory actions, which could result in 
monetary penalties and damages and divert management’s time and attention. 
Our business depends on continued and unimpeded access to the Internet by us and our users. Internet 
access providers may be able to restrict, block, degrade, or charge for access to certain of our products and 
services, which could lead to additional expenses and the loss of users and advertisers. 
Our products and services depend on the ability of our users to access the Internet, and certain of our products 
require significant bandwidth to work effectively. Currently, this access is provided by companies that have significant 
market power in the broadband and internet access marketplace, including incumbent telephone companies, cable 
companies, mobile communications companies, and government-owned service providers. Some of these providers 
have taken, or have stated that they may take, measures that could degrade, disrupt, or increase the cost of user 
access to certain of our products by restricting or prohibiting the use of their infrastructure to support or facilitate our 
offerings, by charging increased fees to us or our users to provide our offerings, or by providing our competitors 
preferential access. Some jurisdictions have adopted regulations prohibiting certain forms of discrimination by internet 
access providers; however, substantial uncertainty exists in the U.S. and elsewhere regarding such protections. For 
example, in 2018 the U.S. Federal Communications Commission repealed net neutrality rules, which could permit 
internet access providers to restrict, block, degrade, or charge for access to certain of our products and services. In 
addition, in some jurisdictions, our products and services have been subject to government-initiated restrictions or 
blockages. These could harm existing key relationships, including with our users, customers, advertisers, and/or 
content providers, and impair our ability to attract new ones; harm our reputation; and increase costs, thereby 
negatively affecting our business. 
Risks Related to Laws, Regulations, and Policies 
We are subject to a variety of new, existing, and changing laws and regulations worldwide that could 
harm our business, and will likely be subject to an even broader scope of laws and regulations as we continue 
to expand our business. 
We are subject to numerous U.S. and foreign laws and regulations covering a wide variety of subjects, and our 
introduction of new businesses, products, services, and technologies will likely continue to subject us to additional laws 
and regulations. In recent years, governments around the world have proposed and adopted a large number of new 
laws and regulations relevant to the digital economy, particularly in the areas of data privacy and security, competition, 
environmental, social and governance (ESG) requirements, AI, and online content. The costs of compliance with these 
measures are high and are likely to increase in the future. 
New or changing laws and regulations, or new interpretations or applications of existing laws and regulations in a 
manner inconsistent with our practices, have resulted in, and may continue to result in, less useful products and 
services, altered business practices, limited ability to pursue certain business models or offer certain products and 
services, substantial costs, and civil or criminal liability. Examples include laws and regulations regarding: 
•Competition and technology platforms’ business practices: Laws and regulations focused on large 
technology platforms, including the Digital Markets Act in the European Union (EU); regulations and legal Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
18.  settlements in the U.S., South Korea, and elsewhere that affect Google Play’s billing policies , fees, and 
business model; as well as litigation and new regulations under consideration in a range of jurisdictions.
•AI: Laws and regulations focused on the development, use, and provision of AI technologies and other digital 
products and services, which could result in monetary penalties or other regulatory actions. For example, while 
legislative text has yet to be finalized and formally approved, provisional political agreement on a proposed EU 
AI Act was reached between co-legislators in December 2023, including that specific transparency and other 
requirements would be introduced for general purpose AI systems and the models on which those systems are 
based.  In addition, the White House's Executive Order on the Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and 
Use of Artificial Intelligence devises a framework for the U.S. government, among other things, to regulate 
private sector use and development of certain foundation models. 
•Data privacy, collection, and processing:  Laws and regulations further restricting the collection, processing, 
and/or sharing of user or advertising-related data, including privacy and data protection laws; laws affecting the 
processing of children's data (as discussed further below), data breach notification laws, and laws limiting data 
transfers (including data localization laws). 
•Copyright and other intellectual property : Copyright and related laws, including the EU Directive on 
Copyright in the Digital Single Market and European Economic Area transpositions, which may introduce new 
licensing regimes, increase liability with respect to content uploaded by users or  linked to from our platforms,  
or create property rights in news publications that could require payments to news agencies and publishers, 
which may result in other regulatory actions . 
•Content  moderation : Various laws covering content moderation and removal, and related disclosure 
obligations, such as the EU's Digital Services Act, Florida’s Senate Bill 7072 and Texas’ House Bill 20, and 
laws and proposed legislation in Singapore, Australia, and the United Kingdom that impose penalties for failure 
to remove certain types of content or require disclosure of information about the operation of our services and 
algorithms, which may make it harder for services like Google Search and YouTube to detect and deal with 
low-quality, deceptive, or harmful content.
•Consumer  protection : Consumer protection laws, including the EU’s New Deal for Consumers, which could 
result in monetary penalties and create a range of new compliance obligations.
In addition, the applicability and scope of these and other laws and regulations, as interpreted by courts , 
regulators, or administrative bodies, remain uncertain and could be interpreted in ways that harm our business. For 
example, we rely on statutory safe harbors, like those set forth in the Digital Millennium Copyright Act and Section 230 
of the Communications Decency Act in the U.S. and the E-Commerce Directive in Europe, to protect against liability for 
various linking, caching, ranking, recommending, and hosting activities. Legislation or court rulings affecting these safe 
harbors may adversely affect us and may impose significant operational challenges. There are legislative proposals 
and pending litigation in the U.S., EU, and around the world that could diminish or eliminate safe harbor protection for 
websites and online platforms. Our development, use, and commercialization of AI products and services (including 
our implementation of AI in our offerings and internal systems) could subject us to regulatory action and legal liability, 
including under specific legislation regulating AI, as well as new applications of existing data protection, cybersecurity, 
privacy, intellectual property, and other laws.
We are and may continue to be subject to claims, lawsuits, regulatory and government investigations, 
enforcement actions, consent orders, and other forms of regulatory scrutiny and legal liability that could harm 
our business, reputation, financial condition, and operating results.
We are subject to claims, lawsuits, regulatory and government investigations, other proceedings, and orders 
involving competition, intellectual property, data privacy and security, tax and related compliance, labor and 
employment, commercial disputes, content generated by our users, goods and services offered by advertisers or 
publishers using our platforms, personal injury, and other matters. We  are also  subject to a variety of claims including 
product warranty, product liability, and consumer protection claims related to product defects, among other litigation, 
and we may also be subject to claims involving health and safety, hazardous materials usage, other environmental 
effects, AI training, development, and commercialization , or service disruptions or failures. Claims have been brought, 
and we expect will continue to be brought, against us for defamation, negligence, breaches of contract, copyright and 
trademark infringement, unfair competition, unlawful activity, torts, privacy rights violations, fraud, or other legal 
theories based on the nature and content of information available on or via our services, the design and effect of our 
products and services, or due to our involvement in hosting, transmitting, marketing, branding, or providing access to 
content created by third parties. Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
19.  For example, in December 2023, a California jury delivered a verdict in Epic Games v. Google  finding that Google 
violated antitrust laws related to Google Play's billing practices. The presiding judge will determine remedies in 2024 
and the range of potential remedies vary widely. We plan to appeal. In addition, the U.S. Department of Justice, 
various U.S. states, and other plaintiffs have filed several antitrust lawsuits about various aspects of our business, 
including our advertising technologies and practices, the operation and distribution of Google Search, and the 
operation and distribution of the Android operating system and Play Store. Other regulatory agencies in the U.S. and 
around the world, including competition enforcers, consumer protection agencies, and data protection authorities, have 
challenged and may continue to challenge our business practices and compliance with laws and regulations. We are 
cooperating with these investigations and defending litigation  or appealing decisions where appropriate.  
Various laws, regulations, investigations, enforcement lawsuits, and regulatory actions have  involved in the past , 
and may in the future result in substantial fines and penalties, injunctive relief, ongoing monitoring and auditing 
obligations, changes to our products and services, alterations to our business models and operations , including 
divestiture , and collateral related civil litigation or other adverse consequences, all of which could harm our business, 
reputation, financial condition, and operating results. 
Any of these legal proceedings could result in legal costs, diversion of management resources, negative publicity 
and other harms to our business. Estimating liabilities for our pending proceedings is a complex, fact-specific , and 
speculative process that requires significant judgment, and the amounts we are ultimately liable for may be less than or 
exceed our estimates. The resolution of one or more such proceedings has resulted in, and may in the future result in, 
additional substantial fines, penalties, injunctions, and other sanctions that could harm our business, reputation, 
financial condition, and operating results. 
For additional information about the ongoing material legal proceedings to which we are subject, see Legal 
Proceedings in Part I, Item 3 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Privacy, data protection, and data usage regulations are complex and rapidly evolving areas. Any failure 
or alleged failure to comply with these laws could harm our business, reputation, financial condition, and 
operating results. 
Authorities around the world have adopted and are considering a number of legislative and regulatory proposals 
concerning data protection, data usage, and encryption of user data. Adverse legal rulings, legislation, or regulation 
have resulted in, and may continue to result in, fines and orders requiring that we change our practices, which have 
had and could continue to have an adverse effect on how we provide services, harming our business, reputation, 
financial condition, and operating results. These laws and regulations are evolving and subject to interpretation, and 
compliance obligations could cause us to incur substantial costs or harm the quality and operations of our products 
and services in ways that harm our business.  Examples of these laws include : 
•The General Data Protection Regulation and the United Kingdom General Data Protection Regulations, which 
apply to all of our activities conducted from an establishment in the EU or the United Kingdom, respectively, or 
related to products and services that we offer to EU or the United Kingdom users or customers, respectively, or 
the monitoring of their behavior in the EU or the UK, respectively.
•Various comprehensive U.S. state and foreign privacy laws, which give new data privacy rights to their 
respective residents (including, in California, a private right of action in the event of a data breach resulting 
from our failure to implement and maintain reasonable security procedures and practices) and impose 
significant obligations on controllers and processors of consumer data.
•State laws governing the processing of biometric information, such as the Illinois Biometric Information Privacy 
Act and the Texas Capture or Use of Biometric Identifier Act, which impose obligations on businesses that 
collect or disclose consumer biometric information. 
•Various federal, state, and foreign laws governing how companies provide age appropriate experiences to 
children and minors, including the collection and processing of children and minor’s data. These include the 
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998, and the United Kingdom Age-Appropriate Design Code, all of 
which address the use and disclosure of the personal data of children and minors and impose obligations on 
online services or products directed to or likely to be accessed by children. 
•The California Internet of Things Security Law, which regulates the security of data used in connection with 
internet-connected devices.
•The EU’s Digital Markets Act, which will require in-scope companies to obtain user consent for combining data 
across certain products and require search engines to share anonymized data with rival companies, among 
other changes. Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
20.  Further, we are subject to evolving laws and regulations that dictate whether, how, and under what circumstances 
we can transfer, process and/or receive personal data, as well as ongoing enforcement actions from supervisory 
authorities related to cross-border transfers of personal data.  The validity of various data transfer mechanisms  we 
currently rely upon remains subject to legal, regulatory, and political developments in both Europe and the U.S., which 
may require us to adapt our existing arrangements.
We face, and may continue to face, intellectual property and other claims that could be costly to defend, 
result in significant damage awards or other costs (including indemnification awards), and limit our ability to 
use certain technologies. 
We, like other internet, technology, and media companies, are frequently subject to litigation based on allegations 
of infringement or other violations of intellectual property rights, including patent, copyright, trade secrets, and 
trademarks. Parties have also sought broad injunctive relief against us by filing claims in U.S. and international courts 
and the U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC) for exclusion and cease-and-desist orders. In addition, patent-
holding companies may frequently seek to generate income from patents they have obtained by bringing claims 
against us. As we continue to expand our business, the number of intellectual property claims against us has increased 
and may continue to increase as we develop and acquire new products, services, and technologies. 
Adverse results in any of these lawsuits may include awards of monetary damages, costly royalty or licensing 
agreements (if licenses are available at all), or orders limiting our ability to sell our products and services in the U.S. or 
elsewhere, including by preventing us from offering certain features, functionalities, products, or services in certain 
jurisdictions. They may also cause us to change our business practices in ways that could result in a loss of revenues 
for us and otherwise harm our business. 
Many of our agreements with our customers and partners, including certain suppliers, require us to defend 
against certain intellectual property infringement claims and in some cases indemnify them for certain intellectual 
property infringement claims against them, which could result in increased costs for defending such claims or 
significant damages if there were an adverse ruling in any such claims. Such customers and partners may also 
discontinue the use of our products, services, and technologies, as a result of injunctions or otherwise, which could 
result in loss of revenues and harm our business. Moreover, intellectual property indemnities provided to us by our 
suppliers, when obtainable, may not cover all damages and losses suffered by us and our customers arising from 
intellectual property infringement claims. Furthermore, in connection with our divestitures, we have agreed, and may in 
the future agree, to provide indemnification for certain potential liabilities, including those associated with intellectual 
property claims. Regardless of their merits, intellectual property claims are often time consuming and expensive to 
litigate or settle. To the extent such claims are successful, they could harm our business, including our product and 
service offerings, financial condition, and operating results. 
Expectations relating to ESG considerations could expose us to potential liabilities, increased costs, and 
reputational harm. 
We are subject to laws, regulations, and other measures that govern a wide range of topics, including those 
related to matters beyond our core products and services. For instance, new laws, regulations, policies, and 
international accords relating to ESG matters, including sustainability, climate change,  human capital, and diversity, are 
being developed and formalized in Europe, the U.S., and elsewhere, which may entail specific, target-driven 
frameworks and/or disclosure requirements. We have implemented robust ESG programs, adopted reporting 
frameworks and principles, and announced a number of goals and initiatives. The implementation of these goals and 
initiatives may require considerable investments, and our goals, with all of their contingencies, dependencies, and in 
certain cases, reliance on third-party verification and/or performance, are complex and ambitious,  and may change. 
We cannot guarantee that our goals and initiatives will be fully realized on the timelines we expect or at all, and 
projects that are completed as planned may not achieve the results we anticipate . Any failure, or perceived failure, by 
us to adhere to our public statements, comply fully with developing interpretations of ESG laws and regulations, or 
meet evolving and varied stakeholder expectations and standards could harm our business, reputation, financial 
condition, and operating results.
We could be subject to changes in tax rates, the adoption of new U.S. or international tax legislation, or 
exposure to additional tax liabilities. 
We are subject to a variety of taxes and tax collection obligations in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. 
Our effective tax rates are affected by a variety of factors, including changes in the mix of earnings in jurisdictions with 
different statutory tax rates, net gains and losses on hedges and related transactions under our foreign exchange risk 
management program, changes in our stock price for shares issued as employee compensation, changes in the 
valuation of our deferred tax assets or liabilities, and the application of different provisions of tax laws or changes in tax 
laws, regulations, or accounting principles (including changes in the interpretation of existing laws). Further, if we are Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
21.  unable or fail to collect taxes on behalf of customers, employees and partners as the withholding agent, we could 
become liable for taxes that are levied against third parties. 
We are subject to regular review and audit by both domestic and foreign tax authorities. As a result, we have 
received, and may in the future receive, assessments in multiple jurisdictions, on various tax-related assertions, such 
as transfer-pricing adjustments or permanent-establishment claims. Any adverse outcome of such a review or audit 
could harm our financial condition and operating results, require adverse changes to our business practices, or subject 
us to additional litigation and regulatory inquiries. In addition, the determination of our worldwide provision for income 
taxes and other tax liabilities requires significant judgment and often involves uncertainty. Although we believe our 
estimates are reasonable, the ultimate tax outcome may differ from the amounts recorded in our financial statements 
and may affect our financial results in the period or periods for which such determination is made. 
Furthermore, due to shifting economic and political conditions, tax policies, laws, or rates in various jurisdictions 
may be subject to significant changes in ways that could harm our financial condition and operating results. For 
example, various jurisdictions around the world have enacted or are considering revenue-based taxes such as digital 
services taxes and other targeted taxes, which could lead to inconsistent and potentially overlapping international tax 
regimes. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) is coordinating negotiations among 
more than  140 countries with the goal of achieving consensus around substantial changes to international tax policies, 
including the implementation of a minimum global effective tax rate of 15%. O ur effective tax rate and cash tax 
payments could increase in future years as a result of these changes.
Risks Related to Ownership of our Stock 
We cannot guarantee that any share repurchase program will be fully consummated or will enhance long-
term stockholder value, and share repurchases could increase the volatility of our stock prices and could 
diminish our cash reserves. 
We engage in share repurchases of our Class A and Class C stock from time to time in accordance with 
authorizations from the Board of Directors of Alphabet. Our repurchase program does not have an expiration date and 
does not obligate Alphabet to repurchase any specific dollar amount or to acquire any specific number of shares. 
Further, our share repurchases could affect our share trading prices, increase their volatility, reduce our cash reserves 
and may be suspended or terminated at any time, which may result in a decrease in the trading prices of our stock. 
The concentration of our stock ownership limits our stockholders’ ability to influence corporate matters. 
Our Class B stock has 10 votes per share, our Class A stock has one vote per share, and our Class C stock has 
no voting rights. As of December 31, 2023, Larry Page and Sergey Brin beneficially owned approximately 86.5% of our 
outstanding Class B stock, which represented approximately  51.5%  of the voting power of our outstanding common 
stock. Through their stock ownership, Larry and Sergey have significant influence over all matters requiring 
stockholder approval, including the election of directors and significant corporate transactions, such as a merger or 
other sale of our company or our assets, for the foreseeable future. In addition, because our Class C stock carries no 
voting rights (except as required by applicable law), the issuance of the Class C stock, including in future stock-based 
acquisition transactions and to fund employee equity incentive programs, could continue Larry and Sergey’s current 
relative voting power and their ability to elect all of our directors and to determine the outcome of most matters 
submitted to a vote of our stockholders. The share repurchases made pursuant to our repurchase program may also 
affect Larry and Sergey’s relative voting power. This concentrated control limits or severely restricts other stockholders’ 
ability to influence corporate matters and we may take actions that some of our stockholders do not view as beneficial, 
which could reduce the market price of our Class A stock and our Class C stock. 
Provisions in our charter documents and under Delaware law could discourage a takeover that 
stockholders may consider favorable. 
Provisions in Alphabet’s certificate of incorporation and bylaws may have the effect of delaying or preventing a 
change of control or changes in our management. These provisions include the following: 
•Our Board of Directors has the right to elect directors to fill a vacancy created by the expansion of the Board of 
Directors or the resignation, death, or removal of a director.
•Our stockholders may not act by written consent, which makes it difficult to take certain actions without holding 
a stockholders' meeting.
•Our certificate of incorporation prohibits cumulative voting in the election of directors. This limits the ability of 
minority stockholders to elect director candidates.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
22.  •Stockholders must provide advance notice to nominate individuals for election to the Board of Directors or to 
propose matters that can be acted upon at a stockholders’ meeting. These provisions may discourage or deter 
a potential acquirer from conducting a solicitation of proxies to elect the acquirer's own slate of directors or 
otherwise attempting to obtain control of our company. 
•Our Board of Directors may issue, without stockholder approval, shares of undesignated preferred stock, 
which makes it possible for our Board of Directors to issue preferred stock with voting or other rights or 
preferences that could impede the success of any attempt to acquire us. 
As a Delaware corporation, we are also subject to certain Delaware anti-takeover provisions. Under Delaware 
law, a corporation may not engage in a business combination with any holder of 15% or more of its outstanding voting 
stock unless the holder has held the stock for three years or, among other things, the Board of Directors has approved 
the transaction. Our Board of Directors could rely on Delaware law to prevent or delay an acquisition of us. 
The trading price for our Class A stock and non-voting Class C stock may continue to be volatile. 
The trading price of our stock has at times experienced significant volatility and may continue to be volatile. In 
addition to the factors discussed in this report, the trading prices of our Class A stock and Class C stock have 
fluctuated, and may continue to fluctuate widely, in response to various factors, many of which are beyond our control, 
including, among others, the activities of our peers and changes in broader economic and political conditions around 
the world. These broad market and industry factors could harm the market price of our Class A stock and our Class C 
stock, regardless of our actual operating performance. 
General Risks 
Our operating results may fluctuate, which makes our results difficult to predict and could cause our 
results to fall short of expectations. 
Our operating results have fluctuated, and may in the future fluctuate, as a result of a number of factors, many 
outside of our control, including the cyclical nature and seasonality in our business and geopolitical events. As a result, 
comparing our operating results (including our expenses as a percentage of our revenues) on a period-to-period basis 
may not be meaningful, and our past results should not be relied on as an indication of our future performance. 
Consequently, our operating results in future quarters may fall below expectations. 
Acquisitions, joint ventures, investments, and divestitures could result in operating difficulties, dilution, 
and other consequences that could harm our business, financial condition, and operating results. 
Acquisitions, joint ventures, investments, and divestitures are important elements of our overall corporate strategy 
and use of capital, and these transactions could be material to our financial condition and operating results. We expect 
to continue to evaluate and enter into discussions regarding a wide array of such potential strategic arrangements, 
which could create unforeseen operating difficulties and expenditures. Some of the areas where we face risks include: 
•diversion of management time and focus from operating our business to challenges related to acquisitions and 
other strategic arrangements; 
•failure to obtain required approvals on a timely basis, if at all, from governmental authorities, or conditions 
placed upon approval that could, among other things, delay or prevent us from completing a transaction, or 
otherwise restrict our ability to realize the expected financial or strategic goals of a transaction;
•failure to successfully integrate the acquired operations, technologies, services, and personnel (including 
cultural integration and retention of employees) and further develop the acquired business or technology; 
•implementation of controls (or remediation of control deficiencies), procedures, and policies at the acquired 
company; 
•integration of the acquired company’s accounting and other administrative systems, and the coordination of 
product, engineering, and sales and marketing functions;
•transition of operations, users, and customers onto our existing platforms;
•in the case of foreign acquisitions, the need to integrate operations across different cultures and languages 
and to address the particular economic, currency, political, and regulatory risks associated with specific 
countries; 
•failure to accomplish commercial, strategic or financial objectives with respect to investments, joint ventures, 
and other strategic arrangements;
•failure to realize the value of investments and joint ventures due to a lack of liquidity;Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
23.  •liability for activities of the acquired company before the acquisition, including patent and trademark 
infringement claims, data privacy and security issues, violations of laws, commercial disputes, tax liabilities, 
warranty claims, product liabilities, and other known and unknown liabilities; and
•litigation or other claims in connection with the acquired company, including claims from terminated 
employees, customers, former stockholders, or other third parties.
Our failure to address these risks or other problems encountered in connection with our past or future acquisitions 
and other strategic arrangements could cause us to fail to realize their anticipated benefits, incur unanticipated 
liabilities, and harm our business generally. 
Our acquisitions and other strategic arrangements could also result in dilutive issuances of our equity securities, 
the incurrence of debt, contingent liabilities, or amortization expenses, or impairment of goodwill and/or purchased 
long-lived assets, and restructuring charges, any of which could harm our financial condition and operating results. 
Also, the anticipated benefits or value of our acquisitions and other strategic arrangements may not materialize. In 
connection with our divestitures, we have agreed, and may in the future agree, to provide indemnification for certain 
potential liabilities, which could harm our financial condition and operating results. 
We rely on highly skilled personnel and, if we are unable to retain or motivate key personnel, hire 
qualified personnel, or maintain and continue to adapt our corporate culture, we may not be able to grow or 
operate effectively. 
Our performance and future success depends in large part upon the continued service of key technical leads as 
well as  members of our senior management team. For instance, Sundar Pichai is critical to the overall management of 
Alphabet and its subsidiaries and plays an important role in the development of our technology, maintaining our 
culture, and setting our strategic direction. 
Our ability to compete effectively and our future success depend  on our continuing to identify, hire, develop, 
motivate, and retain highly skilled personnel for all areas of our organization. Competition in our industry for qualified 
employees is intense, and certain of our competitors have directly targeted, and may continue to target, our 
employees. In addition, our compensation arrangements, such as our equity award programs, may not always be 
successful in attracting new employees and retaining and motivating our existing employees. Restrictive immigration 
policy and regulatory changes may also affect our ability to hire, mobilize, or retain some of our global talent. All of our 
executive officers and key employees are at-will employees, and we do not maintain any key-person life insurance 
policies.
In addition, we believe that our corporate culture fosters innovation, creativity, and teamwork. As our organization 
grows and evolves, we may need to adapt our corporate culture and work environments to ever-changing 
circumstances, such as during times of a natural disaster or pandemic, and these changes could affect our ability to 
compete effectively or have an adverse effect on our corporate culture. Under our hybrid work models, we may 
experience increased costs and/or disruption, in addition to potential effects on our ability to operate effectively and 
maintain our corporate culture. 
ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
Not applicable.
ITEM 1C.  CYBERSECURITY
We maintain a comprehensive process for identifying, assessing, and managing material risks from cybersecurity 
threats as part of our broader risk management system and processes. We obtain input, as appropriate, for our 
cybersecurity risk management program on the security industry and threat trends from multiple external experts and 
internal threat intelligence teams.  Teams of dedicated privacy, safety, and security professionals oversee cybersecurity 
risk management and mitigation, incident prevention, detection, and remediation. Leadership for these teams are 
professionals with deep cybersecurity expertise across multiple industries, including our Vice President of Privacy, 
Safety , and Security Engineering . Our executive leadership team, along with input from the above teams, are 
responsible for our overall enterprise risk management system and processes and regularly consider cybersecurity 
risks in the context of other material risks to the company.
As part of our cybersecurity risk management system, our incident management team s track and log privacy and 
security incidents across Alphabet , our vendors, and other third-party service providers to remediate and resolve any 
such incidents. Significant incidents are reviewed regularly by a cross-functional working group to determine whether 
further escalation is appropriate. Any incident assessed as  potentially being or potentially  becoming material is 
immediately escalated for further assessment, and then reported to designated members of our senior management. 
We consult with  outside counsel as appropriate, including on materiality analysis and disclosure matters , and our Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
24.  senior management makes the final materiality determinations and disclosure and other compliance decisions. Our 
management  apprises Alphabet’s  independent public accounting firm of matters and any relevan t developments .
The Audit and Compliance Committe e has oversight responsibility for risk s and incidents relating to cybersecurity 
threats, including compliance with disclosure requirements, cooperation with law enforcement, and related effects on 
financial and other risks, and it reports  any f indings and recommendations, as appropriate, to the full Board for 
consideration. Senior management regularly discusses cyber risks and trends  and, should they arise, any material 
incidents with the Audit and Compliance Committee.  Internal Audit maintains a dedicated cybersecurity auditing team 
that independently  tests our cybersecurity controls.  
Our business strategy, results of operations and financial condition have not been materially affected by risks from 
cybersecurity threats, including as a result of previous ly identified cybersecurity incidents , but we cannot provide 
assurance that they will not be materially affected in the future by such risks or any future material incidents. For more 
information on our cybersecurity related risks, see Item 1A Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
ITEM 2. PROPERTIES
Our headquarters are located in Mountain View, California. We own and lease office facilities and data centers 
around the world, primarily in Asia, Eu rope, and North America . We believe our existing facilities are in good condition 
and suitable for the conduct of our business.
ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
For a description of our material pending legal proceedings, see Legal Matters in Note 10  of the Notes to 
Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is 
incorporated herein by reference.
ITEM 4. MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
Not applicable.
PART II
ITEM 5. MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS, AND 
ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES
As of October 2, 2015, Alphabet Inc. became the successor issuer of Google Inc. pursuant to Rule 12g-3(a) under 
the Exchange Act. Our Class A stock has been listed on the Nasdaq Global Select Market under the symbol “GOOG” 
since August 19, 2004, and under the symbol "GOOGL" since April 3, 2014. Prior to August 19, 2004, there was no 
public market for our stock. Our Class B stock is neither listed nor traded. Our Class C stock has been listed on the 
Nasdaq Global Select Market under the symbol “GOOG” since April 3, 2014.
Holders of Record
As of December 31, 2023 , there were approximately  7,305  and 1,757  stockholders of record of our Class A stock 
and Class C stock, respectively. Because many of our shares of Class A stock and Class C stock are held by brokers 
and other institutions on behalf of stockholders, we are unable to estimate the total number of stockholders 
represented by these record holders. As of December 31, 2023 , there were approximately 59 stockholders of record of 
our Class B stock.
Dividend Policy
We have never declared or paid any cash dividend on our common or capital stock. The primary use of capital 
continues to be to invest for the long-term growth of the business. We regularly evaluate our cash and capital structure, 
including the size, pace, and form of capital return to stockholders.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
25.  Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
The following table presents information with respect to Alphabet's repurchases of Class A and Class C stock 
during the quarter ended December 31, 2023 : 
PeriodTotal Number of 
Class A Shares 
Purchased 
(in thousands)(1)Total Number of 
Class C Shares 
Purchased 
(in thousands)(1)Average Price 
Paid per 
Class A 
Share(2)Average Price 
Paid per 
Class C 
Share(2)Total Number of 
Shares 
Purchased as 
Part of Publicly 
Announced 
Programs
(in thousands)(1)Approximate 
Dollar Value of 
Shares that May 
Yet Be Purchased 
Under the 
Program 
(in millions)
October 1 - 31  9,923  38,687 $ 134.66 $ 135.65  48,610 $ 45,736 
November 1 - 30  9,197  28,198 $ 134.53 $ 135.16  37,395 $ 40,725 
December 1 - 31  7,502  24,760 $ 135.76 $ 136.37  32,262 $ 36,347 
Total  26,622  91,645  118,267 
(1) R epurchases are being executed from time to time, subject to general business and market conditions and other investment 
opportunities, through open market purchases or privately negotiated transactions, including through Rule 10b5-1 plans. The 
repurchase program does not have an expiration date. For additional information related to share repurchases, s ee Note 11  of 
the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2)Average price paid per share includes costs associated with the repurchases.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
26.  Stock Performance Graphs
The graph below matches Alphabet Inc. Class A's cumulative five-year total stockholder return on common stock 
with the cumulative total returns of the S&P 500 index, the NASDAQ Composite index, and the RDG Internet 
Composite index. The graph tracks the performance of a $100 investment in our common stock and in each index 
(with the reinvestment of all dividends) from December 31, 2018 , to December 31, 2023 . The returns shown are based 
on historical results and are not intended to suggest future performance.
COMPARISON OF CUMULATIVE 5-YEAR TOTAL RETURN*
ALPHABET INC. CLASS A COMMON STOCK
Among Alphabet Inc., the S&P 500 Index, the
NASDAQ Composite Index, and the RDG Internet Composite Index
Alphabet Inc. Class A S&P 500 NASDAQ Composite
RDG Internet Composite12/183/19 6/19 9/1912/193/20 6/20 9/2012/203/21 6/21 9/2112/213/22 6/22 9/2212/223/23 6/23 9/2312/23$0$50$100$150$200$250$300$350$400
*$100 invested on December 31, 2018 , in stock or index, including reinvestment of dividends. 
Copyright© 2024  S&P, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc. All rights reserved.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
27.  The graph below matches Alphabet Inc. Class C's cumulative five-year total stockholder return on capital stock 
with the cumulative total returns of the S&P 500 index, the NASDAQ Composite index, and the RDG Internet 
Composite index. The graph tracks the performance of a $100 investment in our Class C capital stock and in each 
index (with the reinvestment of all dividends) from December 31, 2018 , to December 31, 2023 . The returns shown are 
based on historical results and are not intended to suggest future performance.
COMPARISON OF CUMULATIVE 5-YEAR TOTAL RETURN*
ALPHABET INC. CLASS C CAPITAL STOCK
Among Alphabet Inc., the S&P 500 Index, the
NASDAQ Composite Index, and the RDG Internet Composite Index
Alphabet Inc. Class C S&P 500 NASDAQ Composite
RDG Internet Composite12/183/19 6/19 9/1912/193/20 6/20 9/2012/203/21 6/21 9/2112/213/22 6/22 9/2212/223/23 6/23 9/2312/23$0$50$100$150$200$250$300$350$400
*$100 invested on December 31, 2018 , in stock or in index, including reinvestment of dividends.
Copyright© 2024  S&P, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc. All rights reserved.
ITEM 6. [Reserved]Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
28.  ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF 
OPERATIONS
Please read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with 
“Note about Forward-Looking Statements,” Part I, Item 1 "Business," Part I, Item 1A "Risk Factors," and our 
consolidated financial statements and related notes included under Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. 
The following section generally discusses 2023 results compared to 2022 results. Discussion of 2022 results 
compared to 2021  results to the extent not included in this report can be found in Item 7 of our 2022  Annual Report on 
Form 10-K .
Understanding Alphabet’s Financial Results
Alphabet is a collection of businesses — the largest of which is Google. We report Google in two segments, 
Google Services and Google Cloud; we also report all non-Google businesses collectively as Other Bets. For 
additional information on our segments, see Part I, Item 1 Business and Note 15  of the Notes to Consolidated 
Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Trends in Our Business and Financial Effect
The following long-term trends have contributed to the results of our consolidated operations, and we anticipate 
that they will continue to affect our future results:
•Users' behaviors and advertising continue to shift online as the digital economy evolves .
The continuing evolution of the online world has contributed to the growth of our business and our revenues since 
inception. We expect that this evolution will continue to benefit our business and our revenues, although at a slower 
pace than we have experienced historically, in particular after the outsized growth in our advertising revenues during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, we face increasing competition for user engagement and advertisers, which may 
affect our revenues.
•Users continue to access our products and services using diverse devices and modalities, which 
allows for new advertising formats that may benefit our revenues but adversely affect our margins.
Our users are accessing our products and services via diverse devices and modalities, such as smartphones, 
wearables, connected TVs, and smart home devices , and want to be able to be connected no matter where they are or 
what they are doing. We are focused on expanding our products and services to stay in front of these trends in order to 
maintain and grow our business.
We benefit from advertising revenues generated from different channels, including mobile, and newer advertising 
formats. The margins from these channels and newer products have generally been lower than those from traditional 
desktop search. Additionally, as the market for a particular device type or modality matures, our advertising revenues 
may be affected. For example, chang ing dynamics within  the global smartphone market, such as increased market 
saturation in developed countries, can affect our mobile advertising revenues.
We expect TAC paid to our distribution partners and Google Network partners to increase as our revenues grow 
and TAC as a percentage of our advertising revenues ("TAC rate") to be affected by changes in device mix; geographic 
mix; partner agreement terms; partner mix; the percentage of queries channeled through paid access points; product 
mix; the relative revenue growth rates of advertising revenues from different channels; and revenue share terms.
We expect these trends to continue to affect our revenues and put pressure on our margins.
•As online advertising evolves, we continue to expand our product offerings, which may affect our 
monetization.
As interactions between users and advertisers change, and as online user behavior evolves, we continue to 
expand our product offerings to serve these changing needs, which may affect our monetization. For example, 
revenues from ads on YouTube and Google Play monetize at a lower rate than our traditional search ads. We also 
expect to continue to incorporate AI innovations into our products, such as AI in Searc h, that could affect our 
monetization trends.  When developing new products and services we generally focus first on user experience and then 
on monetization.
•As users in developing economies increasingly come online, our revenues from international markets 
continue to increase, and may require continued investments. In addition, movements in foreign exchange 
rates affect such revenues. Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
29.  The shift to online, as well as the advent of the multi-device world, has brought opportunities outside of the U.S., 
including in emerging markets, such as India. We continue to invest heavily and develop localized versions of our 
products and advertising programs relevant to our users in these markets. This has led to a trend of increased 
revenues from emerging markets.  We expect that our results will continue to be affected by our performance in these 
markets, particularly as low-cost mobile devices become more available. This trend could affect our revenues as 
developing markets initially monetize at a lower rate than more mature markets.
International revenues represent a significant portion of our revenues and are subject to fluctuations in foreign 
currency exchange rates relative to the U.S. dollar. While we have a foreign exchange risk management program 
designed to reduce our exposure to these fluctuations, this program does not fully offset their effect on our revenues 
and earnings.
•The revenues that we derive beyond advertising  are increasing and may adversely affect our margins.
Revenues  from cloud, consumer subscriptions, platforms, and devices, which may have differing characteristics 
than our advertising revenues,  have grown over time, and we expect this trend to continue as we focus on expanding 
our products and services . The margins on these revenues vary significantly and are generally lower than the margins 
on our advertising revenues.  For example,  sales of our device s  adversely affect our consolidated margins due to 
pressures on pricing and higher cost of sales.
•As we continue to serve our users and expand our businesses, we will invest heavily  in operating and 
capital expenditures.
We continue to make significant research and development investments in areas of strategic focus as we seek to 
develop new, innovative offerings, improve our existing offerings, a nd rapidly and responsibly deploy AI  across our 
businesses. We also expect to  increase , relative to 2023 , our investmen t in our technical infrastructure, including 
servers, netw ork equipment, and data centers, to support the growth of our business and our long-term initiatives, in 
particular in support of AI products and services . In addition, acquisitions and strategic investments contribute to the 
breadth and depth of our offerings, expand our expertise in engineering and other functional areas, and build strong 
partnerships around strategic initiatives .
•We continue to face an evolving regulatory environment, and we are subject to claims, lawsuits, 
investigations, and other forms of potential legal liability, which could affect our business practices and 
financial results.
Changes in social, political, economic, tax, and regulatory conditions or in laws  and policies governing a wide 
range of topics and related legal matters, including investigations, lawsuits, and regulatory actions, have resulted in 
fines and caused us to change our business practices . As these global trends continue, our cost of doing business may 
increase, our ability to pursue certain business models or offer certain products or services may be limited, and we 
may need to change our business practices to comply with evolving regulatory and legal matters . Examples include t he 
antitrust complaints filed by  the U.S. Department of Justice and a number of state Attorneys General; legislative 
proposals and pending litigation in the U.S., EU, and around the world that could diminish or eliminate safe harbor 
protection for websites and online platforms; and the Digital Markets Act and Digital Services Act in Europe and various 
legislative proposals in the U.S. focused on large technology platforms. For additional information, see Item 1A Risk 
Factors and Legal Matters in Note 10  of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of 
this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
•Our employees are critical to our success and we expect to continue investing in them.
Our employees are among our best assets  and are critical for our continued success. We expect to continue 
hiring talented employees around the globe and to provide competitive compensation programs. For additional 
information, see Culture and Workforce in Part I, Item 1 Business of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenues and Monetization Metrics
We generate revenues by delivering relevant, cost-effective online advertising; cloud-based solutions that provide 
enterprise customers of all sizes with infrastructure and platform services as well as communication and collaboration 
tools; sales of other products and services, such as apps and in-app purchases, and devices; and fees received for 
consumer subscription-based products. For additional information on how we recognize revenue, see Note 1  of the 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In addition to the long-term trends and their financial effect on our business discussed above, fluctuations in our 
revenues have been, and may continue to be, affected by a combination of general factors, including:
•changes in foreign currency exchange rates;Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
30.  •changes in pricing, such as those resulting from changes in fee structures, discounts, and customer incentives ;
•general economic conditions and various external dynamics, including geopolitical events,  regulations, and 
other measures and their effect on advertiser, consumer, and enterprise spending ; 
•new product and service launches; and
•seasonality.
Additionally, fluctuations in our revenues generated from advertising ("Google advertising"), revenues from other 
sources ("Google subscriptions, platforms, and devices revenues"), Google Cloud, and Other Bets revenues have 
been, and may continue to be, affected by other factors unique to each set of revenues, as described below.
Google Services
Google Services revenues consist of Google advertising as well as Google subscriptions, platforms, and devices 
revenues.
Google Advertising
Google advertising revenues are comprised of the following: 
•Google Search & other, which includes revenues generated on Google search properties (including revenues 
from traffic generated by search distribution partners who use Google.com as their default search in browsers, 
toolbars, etc.), and other Google owned and operated properties like Gmail, Google Maps, and Google Play;
•YouTube ads, which includes revenues generated on YouTube properties; and
•Google Network, which includes revenues generated on Google Network properties participating in AdMob, 
AdSense, and Google Ad Manager.
We use certain metrics to track how well traffic across various properties is monetized as it relates to our 
advertising revenues: paid clicks and cost-per-click pertain to traffic on Google Search & other properties, while 
impressions and cost-per-impression pertain to traffic on our Google Network properties.
Paid clicks represent engagement by users and include clicks on advertisements by end-users on Google search 
properties and other Google owned and operated properties including Gmail, Google Maps, and Google Play.  Cost-
per-click is defined as click-driven revenues divided by our total number of paid clicks and represents the average 
amount we charge advertisers for each engagement by users.
Impressions include impressions displayed to users on Google Network properties participating primarily in 
AdMob, AdSense, and Google Ad Manager.  Cost-per-impression is defined as impression-based and click-based 
revenues divided by our total number of impressions, and represents the average amount we charge advertisers for 
each impression displayed to users.  
As our business evolves, we periodically review, refine, and update our methodologies for monitoring, gathering, 
and counting the number of paid clicks and the number of impressions, and for identifying the revenues generated by 
the corresponding click and impression activity.
Fluctuations in our advertising revenues, as well as the change in paid clicks and cost-per-click on Google Search 
& other properties and the change in impressions and cost-per-impression on Google Network properties and the 
correlation between these items have been, and may continue to be, affected by factors in addition to the general 
factors described above, such as:
•advertiser competition for keywords;
•changes in advertising quality, formats, delivery or policy;
•changes in device mix; 
•seasonal fluctuations in internet usage, advertising expenditures, and underlying business trends, such as 
traditional retail seasonality; and
•traffic growth in emerging markets compared to more mature markets and across various verticals and 
channels.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
31.  Google Subscriptions, Platforms, and Devices
Google subscriptions, platforms, and devices revenues are comprised of the following:
•consumer subscript ions, which primarily include revenues from YouTube services, such YouTube TV, YouTube  
Music and Premium , and NFL Sunday Ticket, as well as Google One;
•platforms, which primarily include revenues from Google Play from the sales of apps and in-app purchases;
•devices, which primarily include sales of the Pixel family of devices; and
•other products and services.
Fluctuations in our Google subscriptions, platforms, and devices revenues have been, and may continue to be, 
affected by factors in addition to the general factors described above, such as changes in customer usage and 
demand, number of subscribers, and fluctuations in the timing of product launches.
Google Cloud
Google Cloud revenues are comprised of the following:
•Google Cloud Platform , which generates consumption-based fees and subscriptions for infrastructure, 
platform, and other services. These services provide access to solutions such as cybersecurity, databases, 
analytics, and AI offerings including our AI infrastructure, Vertex AI platform , and Duet AI for Google Cloud ;
•Google Workspace, which includes subscriptions for cloud-based communication and collaboration tools for 
enterprises, such as Calendar, Gmail, Docs, Drive, and Meet, with integrated features like Duet AI in Google 
Workspace; and
•other enterprise services.
Fluctuations in our Google Cloud revenues have been, and may continue to be, affected by  factors  in addition to 
the general factors described above , such as customer usage.
Other Bets
Revenues from Other Bets are generated primarily from the sale of health care- related services  and internet 
services .
Costs and Expenses 
Our cost structure has two components: cost of revenues and operating expenses. Our operating expenses 
include costs related to R&D, sales and marketing, and general and administrative functions. Certain of our costs and 
expenses, including those associated with the operation of our technical infrastructure as well as components of our 
operating expenses, are generally less variable in nature and may not correlate to changes in revenue. Additionally, 
fluctuations in compensation expenses may not directly correlate with changes in headcount, in particular due to 
annual stock-based compensation (SBC) awards  that generally vest over four years. 
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues is comprised of TAC and other costs of revenues.
•TAC includes: 
◦amounts paid to our distribution partners who make available our search access points and services. 
Our distribution partners include browser providers, mobile carriers, original equipment manufacturers, 
and software developers ; and
◦amounts paid to Google Network partners primarily for ads displayed on their properties.
•Other cost of revenues  primarily includes :
◦compensation expense related to our data centers and other operations such as content review and 
customer and product support;
◦content acquisition costs, which are payments to content providers from whom we license video and 
other content for distribution  on YouTube and Google Play  (we pay fees to these content providers 
based on revenues generated or a flat fee);
◦depreciation expense related to our technical infrastructure; and
◦inventory and other costs related to the devices  we sell.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
32.  TAC as a percentage of revenues generated from ads placed on Google Network properties are significantly 
higher than TAC as a percentage of revenues generated from ads placed on Google Search & other properties, 
because most of the advertiser revenues from ads served on Google Network properties are paid as TAC to our 
Google Network partners.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses are generally incurred during our normal course of business, which we categorize as either 
R&D, sales and marketing, or general and administrative.
The main components of our R&D expenses are:
•compensation expenses for engineering and technical employees responsible for R&D related to our existing 
and new products and services; 
•depreciation ; and
•third-party services fees primarily relating to consulting and outsourced services in support of our engineering 
and product development efforts.
The main components of our sales and marketing expenses are:
•compensation expenses for employees engaged in sales and marketing, sales support, and certain customer 
service functions; and
•spending relating to our advertising and promotional activities in support of our products and services.
The main components of our general and administrative expenses are:
•compensation expenses for employees in finance, human resources, information technology, legal, and other 
administrative support functions; 
•expenses relating to legal matters, including certain  fines and settlements; and 
•third-party services fees, including audit, consulting, outside legal, and other outsourced administrative 
services.
Other Income (Expense), Net 
OI&E, net primarily consists of interest income (expense), the effect of foreign currency exchange gains (losses), 
net gains (losses) and impairment on our marketable and non-marketable securities, performance fees, and income 
(loss) and impairment from our equity method investments. 
For additional information, including how we account for our investments and factors that can drive fluctuations in 
the value of our investments, see Note 1  and Note 3  of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in 
Part II, Item 8 as well as Item 7A Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk of this Annual Report on 
Form 10-K.
Provision for Income Taxes  
Provision for income taxes represents the estimated amount of federal, state, and foreign income taxes incurred 
in the U.S. and the many jurisdictions in which we operate. The provision includes the effect of reserve provisions and 
changes to reserves that are considered appropriate as well as the related net interest and penalties.
For additional information, including a reconciliation of the U.S. federal statutory rate to our effective tax rate, see 
Note 14  of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
33.  Executive Overview
The following table summarizes our consolidated financial results (in millions, except for per share information 
and percentages):
Year Ended December 31,
2022 2023 $ Change % Change
Consolidated revenues $ 282,836 $ 307,394 $ 24,558  9 %
Change in consolidated constant currency revenues(1) 10 %
Cost of revenues $ 126,203 $ 133,332 $ 7,129  6 %
Operating expenses $ 81,791 $ 89,769 $ 7,978  10 %
Operating income $ 74,842 $ 84,293 $ 9,451  13 %
Operating margin  26 %  27 %  1 %
Other income (expense), net $ (3,514) $ 1,424 $ 4,938 NM
Net income $ 59,972 $ 73,795 $ 13,823  23 %
Diluted EPS $ 4.56 $ 5.80 $ 1.24  27 %
NM = Not Meaningful
(1) See "Use of Non-GAAP Constant Currency Information " below for details relating to our use of constant currency information. 
•Revenues were $307.4 billion , an increase  of 9% year over year, primarily driven by an increase  in Google 
Services revenues of $19.0 billion , or 8%, and an increase  in Google Cloud revenues of $6.8 billion , or 26%. 
•Total constant currency revenues, which exclude the effect of hedging, increased 10% year over year.
•Cost of revenues  was $133.3 billion , an increase  of 6% year over year, primarily driven by increase s in content 
acquisition costs , compensation expenses, and TAC . The increase in compensation expenses included 
charges related to employee severance associated with the reduction in our workforce . Additionally, cost of 
revenues benefited from a reduction in depreciation due to the change in estimated useful lives of our servers 
and network equipment.
•Operating expenses were $89.8 billion , an increase  of 10% year over year , primarily driven by an increase in 
compensation expenses  and charges related to our office space optimization efforts . The increase in 
compensation expenses was largely  the result of  charges related to employee severance associated with the 
reduction in our workforce  and an increase in SBC expense.  Operating  expenses benefited from  the change in 
the estimated useful lives of our servers and certain network equipment.
Other Information:
•In January 2023, we announced a reduction of our workforce , and as a result we recorded employee 
severance and related charges of $2.1 billion  for the year ended December 31, 2023. In addition, we are 
taking actions to optimize our global office space. As a result, exit charges recorded during the year ended 
December 31, 2023, were $1.8 billion . In addition to these exit charges, for the year ended December 31, 
2023, we incurred  $269 million  in accelerated rent and accelerated depreciation . For additional information, 
see Note 8  of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on 
Form 10-K.
•In January 2023, we completed an assessment of the useful lives of our servers and network equipment, 
resulting in a change in the estimated useful life of our servers and certain network equipment to six years. 
The effect of this change was a reduction in depreciation expense of $3.9 billion  for the year ended December 
31, 2023, recognized primarily in cost of revenues and R&D expenses. For additional information, see Note 1  
of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
34.  •On July 21,  2023, the IRS announced a rule change allowing taxpayers to temporarily apply the regulations in 
effect prior to 2022 related to U.S. federal foreign tax credits. This announcement applies to foreign taxes paid 
or accrued in the fiscal years 2022 and 2023. A cumulative one-time adjustment applicable to  the prior period 
for this tax rule change was recorded in 2023  and is reflected in  our effective tax rate of 13.9%  for the year 
ended December 31, 2023.
•Repurchases of Class A and Class C shares were $62.2 billion  for the year ended December 31, 2023 . For 
additional information, see Note 11  of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this 
Annual Report on Form 10-K.
•Operating cash flow was $101.7 billion  for the year ended December 31, 2023 .
•Capital expenditures, which primarily reflected investments in technical infrastructure, were $32.3 billion  for the 
year ended December 31, 2023 .
•As of December 31, 2023 , we had  182,502  employees.
Financial Results
Revenues
The following table presents revenues by type (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
2022 2023
Google Search & other $ 162,450 $ 175,033 
YouTube ads  29,243  31,510 
Google Network  32,780  31,312 
Google advertising  224,473  237,855 
Google subscriptions, platforms, and devices  29,055  34,688 
Google Services total  253,528  272,543 
Google Cloud  26,280  33,088 
Other Bets  1,068  1,527 
Hedging gains (losses)  1,960  236 
Total revenues $ 282,836 $ 307,394 
Google Services
Google advertising revenues
Google Search & other
Google Search & other revenues increased  $12.6 billion  from 2022  to 2023 . The overall growth was driven by 
interrelated factors including increases in search queries resulting from growth in user adoption and usage on mobile 
device s; growth in advertiser spending; and  improvements we have made in ad formats and delivery .
YouTube ads
YouTube ads revenues increased  $2.3 billion  from 2022  to 2023 . The growth was driven by our brand and direct 
response advertising products, both of which benefited from increased spending by our advertisers.
Google Network
Google Network revenues decreased  $1.5 billion  from 2022  to 2023 , primarily driven by a decrease in Google Ad 
Manager and AdSense revenues.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
35.  Monetization Metrics
The following table presents changes in monetization metrics for Google Search & other revenues (paid clicks 
and cost-per-click) and Google Network revenues (impressions and cost-per-impression), expressed as a percentage, 
from 2022  to 2023 :
Google Search & other
Paid clicks change  7 %
Cost-per-click change  1 %
Google Network
Impressions change  (5) %
Cost-per-impression change  0 %
Changes in paid clicks and impressions are driven by a number of interrelated factors, including changes in 
advertiser spending; ongoing product and policy changes; and, as it relates to paid clicks, fluctuations in search 
queries resulting from changes in user adoption and usage, primarily  on mobile devices .
Changes in cost-per-click and cost-per-impression are driven by a number of interrelated factors including 
changes in device mix , geographic mix, advertiser spending, ongoing product and policy changes, product mix, 
property mix, and changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Google subscriptions, platforms, and devices
Google subscriptions , platforms, a nd devices  revenues increased  $5.6 billion  from 2022  to 2023  primarily driven 
by growth in subscriptions , largely for YouTube services. The growth in YouTube services was primarily  due to an 
increase in paid subscribers.
Google subscriptions, platforms, and devices revenues increased $1.0 billion from 2021 to 2022 primarily driven 
by growth in subscription and device revenues, partially offset by a decrease in platform revenues. The growth in 
subscriptions was largely for YouTube services, primarily due to an increase in paid subscribers. The growth in device 
revenues was primarily driven by increased sales of Pixel devices. The decrease in platform revenues was primarily 
due to Google Play, driven by the fee structure changes we announced in 2021 as well as a decrease in buyer 
spending. Additionally, the overall increase in Google subscriptions, platforms, and devices revenues was adversely 
affected by the unfavorable effect of foreign currency exchange rates.
Google Cloud
Google Cloud revenues increased  $6.8 billion  from 2022  to 2023 . Growth was primarily driven by Google Cloud 
Platform followed by Google Workspace offerings. Google Cloud's infrastructure and platform services were the largest 
drivers of growth in Google Cloud Platform.
Revenues by Geography
The following table presents revenues by geography as a percentage of revenues, determined based on the 
addresses of our customers:
 Year Ended December 31,
 2022 2023
United States  48 %  47 %
EMEA  29 %  30 %
APAC  16 %  17 %
Other Americas  6 %  6 %
Hedging gains (losses)  1 %  0 %
For additional information, see Note 2  of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this 
Annual Report on Form 10-K.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
36.  Use of Non-GAAP Constant Currency Information
International revenues, which represent a significant portion of our revenues, are generally transacted in multiple 
currencies and therefore are affected by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
The effect of currency exchange rates on our business is an important factor in understanding period-to-period 
comparisons. We use non-GAAP constant currency revenues ("constant currency revenues") and non-GAAP 
percentage change in constant currency revenues ("percentage change in constant currency revenues") for financial 
and operational decision-making and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparisons. We believe the 
presentation of results on a constant currency basis in addition to U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 
(GAAP) results helps improve the ability to understand our performance, because it excludes the effects of foreign 
currency volatility that are not indicative of our core operating results.
Constant currency information compares results between periods as if exchange rates had remained constant 
period over period. We define constant currency revenues as revenues excluding the effect of foreign currency 
exchange rate movements ("FX Effect") as well as hedging activities, which are recognized at the consolidated level. 
We use constant currency revenues to determine the constant currency revenue percentage change on a year-on-year 
basis. Constant currency revenues are calculated by translating current period revenues using prior year comparable 
period exchange rates, as well as excluding any hedging effects realized in the current period.
Constant currency revenue percentage change is calculated by determining the change in current period 
revenues over prior year comparable period revenues where current period foreign currency revenues are translated 
using prior year comparable period exchange rates and hedging effects are excluded from revenues of both periods.
These results should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, results reported in accordance with 
GAAP. Results on a constant currency basis, as we present them, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures 
used by other companies and are not a measure of performance presented in accordance with GAAP.
The following table presents the foreign currency exchange effect on international revenues and total revenues (in 
millions, except percentages):
Year Ended December 31, 2023
% Change from Prior Period
Year Ended December 31,Less FX 
EffectConstant 
Currency 
RevenuesAs 
ReportedLess 
Hedging 
EffectLess FX 
EffectConstant 
Currency 
Revenues 2022 2023
United States $ 134,814 $ 146,286 $ 0 $ 146,286  9 %  0 %  9 %
EMEA  82,062  91,038  460  90,578  11 %  1 %  10 %
APAC  47,024  51,514  (1,759)  53,273  10 %  (3) %  13 %
Other Americas  16,976  18,320  (654)  18,974  8 %  (4) %  12 %
Revenues, excluding hedging effect  280,876  307,158  (1,953)  309,111  9 %  (1) %  10 %
Hedging gains (losses)  1,960  236 
Total revenues(1)$ 282,836 $ 307,394 $ 309,111  9 %  0 %  (1) %  10 %
(1)Total constant currency revenues of $309.1 billion  for 2023  increased $28.2 billion  compared to $280.9 billion  in revenues, 
excluding hedging effect, for 2022 .
EMEA revenue growth was favorably affected by changes in foreign currency exchange rates, primarily due to the 
U.S. dollar weakening relative to the Euro, partially offset by the U.S. dollar strengthening relative to the Turkish lira.
APAC revenue growth was unfavorably affected by changes in foreign currency exchange rates, primarily due to 
the U.S. dollar strengthening relative to the Japanese yen.
Other Americas revenue growth was unfavorably affected by changes in foreign currency exchange rates, 
primarily due to the U.S. dollar strengthening relative to the Argentine peso.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
37.  Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenues
The following table presents cost of revenues, including TAC (in millions, except percentages):
 Year Ended December 31,
 2021 2022 2023
TAC $ 45,566 $ 48,955 $ 50,886 
Other cost of revenues  65,373  77,248  82,446 
Total cost of revenues $ 110,939 $ 126,203 $ 133,332 
Total cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues  43 %  45 %  43 %
Cost of revenues increased  $7.1 billion  from 2022  to 2023  due to an increase  in other cost of revenues and TAC 
of $5.2 billion  and $1.9 billion , respectively.
The increase  in TAC from 2022  to 2023  was largely due to an increase in TAC paid to distribution partners, 
primarily driven by growth in revenues subject to TAC. The TAC rate decreased from 21.8%  to 21.4%  from 2022  to 
2023  primarily due to a revenue mix shift from Google Network properties to Google Search & other properties. The 
TAC rate on Google Search & other revenues and the TAC rate on Google Network revenues were both substantially 
consistent from 2022 to 2023.
The increase  in other cost of revenues from 2022  to 2023  was primarily due to increases in content acquisition 
costs, largely for YouTube, and compensation expenses, which  included $479 million  of charges related to employee 
severance associated with the reduction in our workforce . Additionally, other cost of revenues benefited from a 
reduction in depreciation expense due to the change in estimated useful lives of our servers and network equipment.
The increase  in other cost of revenues of $11.9 billion  from 2021 to 2022  was primarily due to increases in device 
costs, compensation expenses, depreciation, and equipment-related expenses.
Research and Development
The following table presents R&D expenses (in millions, except percentages):
 Year Ended December 31,
 2022 2023
Research and development expenses $ 39,500 $ 45,427 
Research and development expenses as a percentage of revenues  14 %  15 %
R&D expenses increased  $5.9 billion  from 2022  to 2023  primarily driven by an increase in compensation 
expenses of $2.9 billion, $870 million in charges related to our office space optimization efforts, and an increase in 
depreciation expense of $722 million. The $2.9 billion increase in compensation expenses  was largely the result of a 
4% increase in average headcount , after adjusting for roles affected by the reduction in our workforce, and an increase 
in SBC expense. Additionally, the increase in compensation expenses included  $848 million in employee severance 
charges associated with the reduction in our workforce.  The $722 million increase in depreciation expense reflected an 
offsetting benefit of the change in the estimated useful lives of our servers and network equipment.
Sales and Marketing
The following table presents sales and marketing expenses (in millions, except percentages):
 Year Ended December 31,
 2022 2023
Sales and marketing expenses $ 26,567 $ 27,917 
Sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenues  9 %  9 %
Sales and marketing expenses increased  $1.4 billion  from 2022  to 2023 , primarily driven by an increase in 
compensation expenses of $1.6 billion, partially offset by a decrease in advertising and promotional activities of $441 
million. The $1.6 billion increase in compensation expenses was largely the result of $497 million in employee 
severance charges associated with the reduction in our workforce in addition to a combination of other factors, none of 
which were individually significant .Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
38.  General and Administrative
The following table presents general and administrative expenses (in millions, except percentages):
 Year Ended December 31,
 2022 2023
General and administrative expenses $ 15,724 $ 16,425 
General and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues  6 %  5 %
General and administrative expenses increased  $701 million  from 2022  to 2023 , primarily driven by an increase in 
compensation expenses of $416 million, which was largely the result of $264 million in employee severance charges 
associated with the reduction in our workforce  in addition to a combination of other factors, none of which were 
individually significant . 
Segment Profitability
The following table presents segment operating income (loss) (in millions).
Year Ended December 31,
2022 2023
Operating income (loss):
Google Services $ 82,699 $ 95,858 
Google Cloud  (1,922)  1,716 
Other Bets  (4,636)  (4,095) 
Alphabet-level activities(1) (1,299)  (9,186) 
Total income from operations $ 74,842 $ 84,293 
(1)In addition to the costs included in Alphabet-level activities , hedging gains (losses) related to revenue were $2.0 billion  and 
$236 million  in 2022 and 2023 , respectively . For the year ended December 31, 2023, Alphabet-level activities include charges 
related to the reduction  in force and our office space optimization efforts  totaling  $3.9 billion . In addition, for the year ended 
December 31, 2023, we incurred $269 million  in accelerated rent and accelerated depreciation. For additional information 
relating to our workforce reduction and other initiatives, see Note 8  of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included 
in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For additional information relating to our segments, see Note 15  of the Notes to 
Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Google Services
Google Services  operating income increased  $13.2 billion  from 2022  to 2023 . The increase in operating income 
was primarily driven by an increase in revenues, partially offset by an increase in content acquisition costs and 
compensation expenses  including  an increase in SBC expense . Additionally, operating income benefited from a 
reduction in costs driven by the change in the estimated useful lives of our servers and certain network equipment.
Google Cloud
Google Cloud operating income of $1.7 billion  for 2023  compared to an operating loss of $1.9 billion  for 2022  
represents an increase of $3.6 billion . The increase in operating income was primarily driven by an increase in 
revenues, partially offset by an increase in compensation expenses l argely driven by  headcount growth . Additionally, 
operating income benefited from a reduction in costs driven by the change in the estimated useful lives of our servers 
and certain network equipment.
Other Bets
Other Bets operating loss decreased  $541 million  from 2022  to 2023  primarily due to growth in revenues  as well 
as a reduction in valuation-based compensation liabilities related to Other Bet companies .
Other Income (Expense), Net
The following table presents OI&E, (in millions):Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
39.   Year Ended December 31,
 2022 2023
Interest income $ 2,174 $ 3,865 
Interest expense  (357)  (308) 
Foreign currency exchange gain (loss), net  (654)  (1,238) 
Gain (loss) on debt securities, net  (2,064)  (1,215) 
Gain (loss) on equity securities, net  (3,455)  392 
Performance fees  798  257 
Income (loss) and impairment from equity method investments, net  (337)  (628) 
Other  381  299 
Other income (expense), net $ (3,514) $ 1,424 
OI&E, net increased $4.9 billion  from 2022 to 2023. The increase was primarily due to fluctuations in the value of 
equity securities reflecting market driven changes in the value of our marketable equity securities, investment specific  
event driven changes  in our non-marketable equity securities, and increased interest income due to interest rates. 
For additional information, see Note 7  of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this 
Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Provision for Income Taxes
The following table presents provision for income taxes (in millions, except for effective tax rate):
 Year Ended December 31,
 2022 2023
Income before provision for income taxes $ 71,328 $ 85,717 
Provision for income taxes $ 11,356 $ 11,922 
Effective tax rate  15.9 %  13.9 %
In 2023, the Internal Revenue Services (IRS) issued a rule change allowing taxpayers to temporarily apply the 
regulations in effect prior to 2022 related to U.S. federal foreign tax credits, as well as a separate rule change with 
interim guidance on the capitalization and amortization of R&D expenses. A cumulative one-time adjustment applicable 
to the prior period for these tax rule changes  was recorded in 2023.
The effective tax rate decreased from 2022  to 2023 , reflecting the effect of the two tax rule changes described 
above, particularly the change related to foreign tax cred its. The effect of these tax rule changes was partially offset by 
changes in uncertain tax benefits  and a decrease  in the U.S. federal Foreign Derived Intangible Income tax deduction.
The OECD is coordin ating negotiations among more than 140 countries with the goal of achieving consensus 
around substantial changes to international tax policies, including the implementation of a minimum global effective tax 
rate of 15%. While various countries have implemented the legislation as of January 1, 2024, we do not expect a 
resulting material change to our income tax provision for the 2024 fiscal year. As additional jurisdictions enact such 
legislation, we expect our effective tax rate and cash tax payments could increase in f uture years. 
Financial Condition
Cash, Cash Equivalents, and Marketable Securities
As of December 31, 2023 , we had $110.9 billion  in cash, cash equivalents, and short-term marketable securities. 
Cash equivalents and marketable securities a re comprised of time deposits, money market funds, highly liquid 
government bonds, corporate debt securities, mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities, and marketable equity 
securities.
Sources, Uses of Cash and Related Trends
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities, as well as the cash flow 
that we generate from operations. The primary use of capital continues to be to invest for the long-term growth of the 
business. We regularly evaluate our cash and capital structure, including the size, pace, and form of capital return to 
stockholders.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
40.  The following table presents our cash flows (in millions):
 Year Ended December 31,
 2022 2023
Net cash provided by operating activities $ 91,495 $ 101,746 
Net cash used in investing activities $ (20,298) $ (27,063) 
Net cash used in financing activities $ (69,757) $ (72,093) 
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Our largest source of cash provided by operations are advertising revenues generated by Google Search & other 
properties, Google Network properties, and YouTube properties. In Google Services, we also generate cash through 
consumer subscriptions and the sale of apps and in-app purchases and devices. In Google Cloud we generate cash 
through consumption-based fees and subscriptions for infrastructure, platform, collaboration tools, and other cloud 
services .
Our primary uses of cash from operating activities include payments to distribution and Google Network partners, 
to employees for compensation, and to content providers. Other uses  of cash from operating activities include 
payments to suppliers for devices, to tax authorities for income taxes, and other general corporate expenditures .
Net cash provided by operating activities increased  from 2022  to 2023  due to the increase in cash received from 
customers, partially offset by increase s in ca sh paid for cost of revenues and operating expenses.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities consists primarily of maturities and sales of investments in marketable and 
non-marketable securities. Cash used in investing activities consists primarily of purchases of marketable and non-
marketable securities, purchases of property and equipment, and payments for acquisitions.
Net cash used in investing activities increased  from 2022  to 2023  due to a decrease in maturities and sales of 
marketable securities, partially offset by a decrease in payments for acquisitions.
Cash Used in Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities consists primarily of proceeds from issuance of debt and proceeds from the 
sale of interes ts in consolidated entities. Cash used in financing activities consists primarily of repurchases of stock, 
net payments related to stock-based award activities, and repayments of debt.
Net cash used in financing activities increased  from 2022  to 2023  due to an increase in repurchases of stock.
Liquidity and Material Cash Requirements
We expect existing cash, cash equivalents, short-term marketable securities, cash flows from operations and 
financing activities to continue to be sufficient to fund our operating activities and cash commitments for investing and 
financing activities for at least the next 12 months and thereafter for the foreseeable future.
Capital Expenditures and Leases
We make investments in land and buildings for data centers and offices and information technology assets 
through purchases of property and equipment and lease arrangements  to provide capacity for the growth of our 
services and products.
Capital Expenditures
Our capital investments in propert y and equipment consist primarily of the following major categories:
•technical infrastructure , which consists of our investments in servers and network equipment for computing, 
storage, and networking requirements for ongoing business activities, including AI, (collectively referred to as 
our information technology assets ) and data center land and building construction; and
•office facilities , ground-up development projects, and building improvements  (also referred to as "fit-outs").
Construction in progress consists primarily of technical infrastructure and office facilities which have not yet been 
placed in service. The time frame from date of purchase to placement in service of these assets may extend from 
months to years. For example, our data center construction projects are generally multi-year projects with multiple 
phases, where we acquire land and buildings, construct buildings, and secure and install information technology 
assets.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
41.  During the years ended December 31, 2022  and 2023 , we spent $31.5 billion  and $32.3 billion  on capital 
expenditures, respectively. We expect to increase, relative to 2023, our investment in our technical infrastructure, 
including servers, network equipment, and data centers, to support the growth of our business and our long-term 
initiatives, in particular in support of AI products and services.  Depreciation of our property and equipment commences 
when the deployment of such assets are completed and are ready for our intended use. Land is not depreciated. For 
the years ended December 31, 2022  and 2023 , our depreciation  on property and equipment were $13.5 billion  and 
$11.9 billion , respectively .  
Leases 
For the years ended December 31, 2022  and 2023 , we recognized total operating lease assets of $4.4 billion  and 
$2.9 billion , respectively. As of December 31, 2023 , the amount of total future lease payments under operating leases, 
which had a weighted average remaining lease term of eight  years, was $17.7 billion , of which $3.2 billion  is short-
term. As of December 31, 2023 , we have entered into leases that have not yet commenced with future short-term and 
long-term lease payments of  $657 million  and $3.3 billion , that are not yet recorded on our Consolidated Balance 
Sheets. These leases will commence between 2024  and 2026  with non-cancelable lease terms of one to 25 years. 
For the years ended December 31, 2022  and 2023 , our operating lease expenses (including variable lease costs) 
were $3.7 billion  and $4.5 billion , respectively. Finance lease costs  were not material for the years ended 
December 31, 2022  and 2023 . For additional information, see Note 4  of the Notes to Consolidated Financial 
Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financing
We have a short-term debt financing program of up to $10.0 billion  through the issuance of commercial paper. Net 
proceeds from this program are used for general corporate purposes. As of December 31, 2023 , we had no 
commercial paper outstanding.
As of December 31, 2023 , we had $10.0 billion  of revolving credit facilities, $4.0 billion  expiring in April 2024  and 
$6.0 billion  expiring in April 2028 . The interest rates for all credit facilities are determined based on a formula using 
certain market rates, as well as our progress toward the achievement of certain sustainability goals . No amounts have 
been borrowed under the credit facilities.
As of December 31, 2023 , we had senior unsecured notes outstanding with a total carrying value of $12.9 billion  
with short-term and long-term future interest payments of $214 million  and $3.6 billion , respectively. For additional 
information, see Note 6  of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on 
Form 10-K.
We primarily utilize contract manufacturers for the assembly of our servers used in our technical infrastructure 
and devices we sell. We have agreements where we may purchase components directly from suppliers and then 
supply these components to contract manufacturers for use in the assembly of the servers and d evice s. Certain of 
these arrangements result in a portion of the cash received from and paid to the contract manufacturers to be 
presented as financing activities in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows included in Item 8 of this Annual 
Report on F orm 10-K.
Share Repurchase Program
During 2023  we repurchased and subsequently retired 528 million  shares for $62.2 billion .
In April 2023, the Board of Directors of Alphabet authorized the company to repurchase up to an additional $70.0 
billion of its Class A and Class C shares. As of December 31, 2023, $36.3 billion  remains available for Class A and 
Class C share repurchases.
The following table presents Class A and Class C shares repurchased and subsequently retired (in millions):
Year Ended December 31, 2022 Year Ended December 31, 2023
Shares Amount Shares Amount
Class A share repurchases 61$ 6,719 78$ 9,316 
Class C share repurchases 469  52,577 450  52,868 
Total share repurchases(1)530 $ 59,296 528 $ 62,184 
(1)         Shares repurchased include unsettled repurchases as of December 31, 2023 .
For additional information, see Note 11  of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of 
this Annual Report on Form 10-K.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
42.  European Commission Fines
In 2017, 2018 and 2019, the EC announced decisions that certain actions taken by Google infringed European 
competition law and imposed fines of €2.4 billion  ($2.7 billion  as of June 27, 2017 ), €4.3 billion  ($5.1 billion  as of 
June 30, 2018 ), and €1.5 billion  ($1.7 billion  as of March 20, 2019 ), respectively. On September 14, 2022, the General 
Court reduced the 2018 fine from €4.3 billion  to €4.1 billion. We subsequently filed an appeal to the European Court of 
Justice.
While each EC decision is under appeal, we included the fines in accrued expenses and other current liabilities 
on our Consolidated Balance Sheets as we provided bank guarantees (in lieu of a cash payment) for the fines. For 
additional information, see Note 10  of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual 
Report on Form 10-K.
Taxes
As of December 31, 2023 , we had income taxes payabl e of $4.2 billion , of which $2.1 billion  was short-term, 
related to a one-time transition tax payable incurred as a result of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ("Tax Act").  As 
permitted by the Tax Act, we will pay the transition tax in annual interest-free installments through 2025 . We also have 
long-term taxes payable  of $6.3 billion  primarily related to uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2023 .
Purchase Commitments and Other Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2023 , we had material purchase commitments and other contractual obligations of $45.9 
billion , of which $31.6 billion  was short-term. These amounts primarily consist of p urchase orders for certain technical 
infrastructure as well as  the non-cancelable portion or the minimum cancellation fee in certain agreements related to 
commitments to purchase licenses, including content licenses, inventory and network capacity . For those agreements 
with variable terms, we do not estimate the non-cancelable obligation beyond any minimum quantities and/or pricing as 
of December 31, 2023 . In certain instances, the amount of our contractual obligations may change based on the 
expected timing of order fulfillment from our suppliers.  For more  information related to our content licenses, see Note 
10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In addition, we regularly enter into multi-year, non-cancellable agreements to purchase renewable energy and 
energy attributes, such as renewable energy certificates. These agreements do not include a minimum dollar 
commitment. The amounts to be paid under these agreements are based on the actual volumes to be generated and 
are not readily determinable.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. In doing so, we have to make 
estimates and assumptions. Our critical accounting estimates are those estimates that involve a significant level of 
uncertainty at the time the estimate was made, and changes in them have had or are reasonably likely to have a 
material effect on our financial condition or results of operations. Accordingly, actual results could differ materially from 
our estimates. We base our estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable 
under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. We have reviewed our critical 
accounting estimates with the Audit and Compliance Committee of our Board of Directors.
For a summary of significant accounting policies and the effect on our financial statements, see Note 1  of the 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Fair Value Measurements of Non-Marketable Equity Securities
We measure certain financial instruments at fair value on a nonrecurring basis, consisting primarily of our non-
marketable equity securities. These investments are accounted for under the measurement alternative method ("the 
measurement alternative") and are measured at cost, less impairment, subject to upward and downward adjustments 
resulting from observable price changes for identical or similar investments of the same issuer. These adjustments 
require quantitative assessments of the fair value of our securities, which may require the use of unobservable inputs. 
Adjustments are determined primarily based on a market approach as of the transaction date and involve the use of 
estimates using the best information available, which may include cash flow projections or other available market data .
Non-marketable equity securities are also evaluated for impairment, based on qualitative factors including the 
companies' financial and liquidity position and access to capital resources, among others. When indicators of 
impairment exist, we prepare quantitative measurements of the fair value of our equity investments using a market 
approach or an income approach, which requires judgment and the use of unobservable inputs, including discount 
rates, investee revenues and costs, and comparable market data of private and public companies, among others. Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
43.  When the quantitative remeasurements of fair value indicate an impairment exists, we write down the investment to its 
current fair value.
We also have compensation arrangements with payouts based on realized returns from certain investments, i.e. 
performance fees. We record compensation expense based on the estimated payouts on an ongoing basis, which may 
result in expense recognized before investment returns are realized and compensation is paid and may require the use 
of unobservable inputs.
Property and Equipment
We assess the reasonableness of the useful lives of our property and equipment periodically as well as when 
other changes occur, such as when there are changes to ongoing business operations, changes in the planned use 
and utilization of assets, or technological advancements, that could indicate a change in the period over which we 
expect to benefit from the assets. 
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in evaluating 
our uncertain tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes.
Recording an uncertain tax position involves various qualitative considerations, including evaluation of 
comparable and resolved tax exposures, applicability of tax laws, and likelihood of settlement. We evaluate uncertain 
tax positions periodically, considering changes in facts and circumstances, such as new regulations or recent judicial 
opinions, as well as the status of audit activities by taxing authorities. Although we believe we have adequately 
reserved for our uncertain tax positions, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not 
be different. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such 
differences will affect the provision for income taxes and the effective tax rate in the period in which such determination 
is made.
The provision for income taxes includes the effect of reserve provisions and changes to reserves as well as the 
related net interest and penalties. In addition, we are subject to the continuous examination of our income tax returns 
by the IRS and other tax authorities which may assert assessments against us. We regularly assess the likelihood of 
adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations and assessments to determine the adequacy of our provision for 
income taxes .
Loss Contingencies
We are regularly subject to claims, lawsuits, regulatory and government investigations, other proceedings, and 
consent orders involving competition, intellectual property, privacy, data security , tax and related compliance, labor and 
employment, commercial disputes, content generated by our users, goods and services offered by advertisers or 
publishers using our platforms, personal injury consumer protection,  and other matters. Certain of these matters 
include speculative claims for substantial or indeterminate amounts of damages. We record a liability when we believe 
that it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. If we determine that a 
loss is reasonably possible and the loss or range of loss can be estimated, we disclose the possible loss  in Note 10  of 
the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. 
We evaluate, on a regular basis, developments in our legal matters that could affect the amount of liability that 
has been previously accrued, and the matters and related reasonably possible losses disclosed, and make 
adjustments and changes to our disclosures. Significant judgment is required to determine both the likelihood and the 
estimated amount of a loss related to such matters. Until the final resolution of such matters, there may be an 
exposure to loss in excess of the amount recorded, and such amounts could be material.
Change in Accounting Estimate
In January 2023, we completed an assessment of the useful lives of our server s and network equipment resulting 
in a change in the estimated useful life of our servers and certain network equipment to six years. This change in 
accounting estimate was effective beginning fiscal year 2023. For additional information, see Note 1  of the Notes to 
Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K .Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
44.  ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
We are exposed to financial market risks, including changes in foreign currency exchange rates, interest rates, 
and equity investment risks. 
Foreign Currency Exchange Risk
We transact business globally in multiple currencies. International revenues, as well as costs and expenses 
denominated in foreign currencies, expose us to the risk of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates against the 
U.S. dollar. As discussed below, we enter into derivative instruments to hedge foreign currency risk. Principal 
currencies hedged included the Australian dollar, British pound, Canadian dollar, Euro, and Japanese yen.  For the 
purpose of analyzing foreign currency exchange risk, we considered the historical trends in foreign currency exchange 
rates and determined that it was reasonably possible that adverse changes in exchange rates of 10% could be 
experienced .
We use foreign currency forward and option contracts to offset the foreign exchange risk on assets and liabilities 
denominated in currencies other than the functional currency of the subsidiary. These forward and option contracts 
reduce, but do not entirely eliminate, the effect of foreign currency exchange rate movements on our assets and 
liabilities. The foreign currency gains and losses on these assets and liabilities are recorded in OI&E, which are offset 
by the gains and losses on the forward and option contracts.
If an adverse 10% foreign currency exchange rate change was applied to total monetary assets, liabilities, and 
commitments denominated in currencies other than the functional currencies at the balance sheet date, it would have 
resulted in an adverse effect on income before income taxes of approxima tely $136 million  and $503 million  as of 
December 31, 2022  and 2023 , respectively, after consideration of the effect of foreign exchange contracts in place for 
the years ended December 31, 2022  and 2023 .
We use foreign currency forward and option contracts, including collars (an option strategy comprised of a 
combination of purchased and written options) to protect forecasted U.S. dollar-equivalent earnings from changes in 
foreign currency exchange rates.  When the U.S. dollar strengthens, gains from foreign currency forward and option 
contacts reduce the foreign currency losses related to our earnings. When the U.S. dollar weakens, losses from foreign 
currency forward and option contracts offset the foreign currency gains related to our earnings. These hedging 
contracts reduce, but do not entirely eliminate, the effect of foreign currency exchange rate movements. We designate 
these contracts as cash flow hedges for accounting purposes. We reflect the gains or losses of foreign currency spot 
rate changes as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (AOCI) and subsequently reclassify them 
into revenues to offset the hedged exposures as they occur. 
If the U.S. dollar weakened by 10% as of December 31, 2022  and 2023 , the amount recorded in AOCI related to 
our cash flow hedges before tax effect would have been approximately  $1.3 billion  and  $1.5 billion  lower as of 
December 31, 2022  and 2023 , respectively. The change in the value recorded in AOCI would be expected to offset a 
corresponding foreign currency change in forecasted hedged revenues when recognized.
We use foreign exchange forward contracts designated as net investment hedges to hedge the foreign currency 
risks related to investment in foreign subsidiaries. These forward contracts serve to offset the foreign currency 
translation risk from our foreign operations.
If the U.S. dollar weakened by 10%, the amount recorded in cumulative translation adjustment (CTA) within AOCI 
related to our net investment hedges before tax effect would have been approximately $903 million  and $946 million  
lower as of December 31, 2022  and 2023 , respectively. The change in value recorded in CTA would be expected to 
offset a corresponding foreign currency translation gain or loss from our investment in foreign subsidiaries.
Interest Rate Risk
Our Corporate Treasury investment strategy is to achieve a return that w ill allow us to preserve capital and 
maintain liquidity. We invest primarily in debt securities, including government bonds, corporate debt securities, 
mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities, money market and other funds, time deposits, and interest rate 
derivatives. By policy, we limit the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. Our investments in both fixed rate and 
floating rate interest earning securities carry a degree of interest rate risk. Fixed rate securities may have their fair 
market value adversely affected due to a rise in interest rates, while floating rate securities may produce less income 
than predicted if interest rates fall. Unrealized gains or losses on our marketable debt securities are primarily due to 
interest rate fluctuations as compared to interest rates at the time of purchase. For certain fixed and variable rate debt 
securities, we have elected the fair value option for which changes in fair value are recorded in OI&E. We measure 
securities for which we have not elected the fair value option at fair value with gains and losses recorded in AOCI until 
the securities are sold, less any expected credit losses. Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
45.  We use value-at-risk (VaR) analysis to determine the potential effect of fluctuations in interest rates on the value 
of our marketable debt security portfolio. The VaR is the expected loss in fair value, for a given confidence interval, for 
our investment portfolio due to adverse movements in interest rates. We use a variance/covariance VaR model with 
95% confidence interval. The estimated one-day loss in fair value of marketable debt securities as of December 31, 
2022  and 2023  are shown below (in millions):
 As of December 31,12-Month Average 
As of December 31,
 2022 2023 2022 2023
Risk category - interest rate $ 256 $ 296 $ 198 $ 271 
Actual future gains and losses associated with our marketable debt security portfolio may differ materially from the 
sensitivity analyses performed as of December 31, 2022  and 2023  due to the inherent limitations associated with 
predicting the timing and amount of changes in interest rates and our actual exposures and positions. VaR analysis is 
not intended to represent actual losses but is used as a risk estimation.
Equity Investment Risk
Our marketable and non-marketable equity securities are subject to a wide variety of market-related risks that 
could substantially reduce or increase the fair value of our holdings.
Our marketable equity securities are publicly traded stocks or funds and our non-marketable equity securities are 
investments in privately held companies, some of which are in the startup or development stages.
We record marketable equity securities not accounted for under the equity method at fair value based on readily 
determinable market values, of which publicly traded stocks and mutual funds are subject to market price volatility, and 
represent $5.2 billion  and $6.0 billion  of our investments as of December 31, 2022  and 2023 , respectively. A 
hypothetical adverse price change of 10% on our December 31, 2023  balance would decrease the fair value of 
marketable equity securities by $597 million . From time to time, we may enter into derivatives to hedge the market 
price risk on certain of our marketable equity securities.
Our non-marketable equity securities not accounted for under the equity method are adjusted to fair value for 
observable transactions for identical or similar investments of the same issuer or impairment (referred to as the 
measurement alternative). The fair value measured at the time of the observable transaction is not necessarily an 
indication of the current fair value as of the balance sheet date. These investments, especially those that are in the 
early stages, are inherently risky because the technologies or products these companies have under development are 
typically in the early phases and may never materialize, and they may experience a decline in financial condition, 
which could result in a loss of a substantial part of our investment in these companies. Valuations of our equity 
investments in private companies are inherently more complex due to the lack of readily available market data and 
observable transactions at lower valuations could result in significant losses. In addition, global economic conditions 
could result in additional volatility. The success of our investment in any private company is also typically dependent on 
the likelihood of our ability to realize appreciation in the value of investments through liquidity events such as public 
offerings, acquisitions, private sales or other market events. Changes in the valuation of non-marketable equity 
securities may not directly correlate with changes in valuation of marketable equity securities. As of December 31, 
2022  and 2023 , the carrying value of our non-marketable equity securities, which were accounted for under the 
measurement alternative, was $28.5 billion  and $28.8 billion , respectively. 
The carrying values of our equity method investments, which totaled approximately $1.7 billion  as of 
December 31, 2022  and 2023 , generally do not fluctuate based on market price changes. However, these investments 
could be impaired if the carrying value exceeds the fair value and is not expected to recover.
For additional information about our equity investments, see Note 1  and Note 3  of the Notes to Consolidated 
Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
46.  ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Alphabet Inc.
INDEX TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
 Page
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm  (PCAOB ID: 42) 48
Financial Statements:
Consolidated Balance Sheets 51
Consolidated Statements of Income 52
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income 53
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity 54
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 55
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 56Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
47.  REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Stockholders and the Board of Directors of Alphabet Inc.
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Alphabet Inc. (the Company) as of December 31, 
2022  and 2023 , the related consolidated statements of income, comprehensive income, stockholders' equity and cash 
flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2023 , and the related notes and financial 
statement schedule listed in the Index at Item 15 (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). In 
our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the 
Company at December 31, 2022  and 2023 , and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three 
years in the period ended December 31, 2023 , in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United 
States) (PCAOB), the Company's internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2023 , based on criteria 
established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the 
Treadway Commission (2013 framework), and our report dated January 30, 2024  expressed an unqualified opinion 
thereon.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express an 
opinion on the Company’s financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with 
the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal 
securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and 
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material 
misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material 
misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to 
those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in 
the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates 
made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe that our 
audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Critical Audit Matter
The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current period audit of the financial 
statements that was communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that: (1) relates to 
accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2) involved our especially challenging, 
subjective or complex judgments. The communication of the critical audit matter does not alter in any way our opinion 
on the consolidated financial statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter 
below, providing a separate opinion on the critical audit matter or on the account or disclosure to which it relates. Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
48.  Loss Contingencies 
Description of 
the MatterThe Company is regularly subject to claims, lawsuits, regulatory and government investigations, 
other proceedings, and consent orders involving competition, intellectual property, data privacy and 
security, tax and related compliance, labor and employment, commercial disputes, content 
generated by its users, goods and services offered by advertisers or publishers using their 
platforms, personal injury, consumer protection, and other matters. As described in Note 10 to the 
consolidated financial statements “Commitments and contingencies” such claims, lawsuits, 
regulatory and government investigations, other proceedings, and consent orders could result in 
adverse consequences.
Significant judgment is required to determine both the likelihood, and the estimated amount, of a 
loss related to such matters. Auditing management’s accounting for and disclosure of loss 
contingencies from these matters involved challenging and subjective auditor judgment in 
assessing the Company’s evaluation of the probability of a loss, and the estimated amount or 
range of loss.
How We 
Addressed the 
Matter in Our 
AuditWe tested relevant controls over the identified risks associated with management’s accounting for 
and disclosure of these matters. This included controls over management’s assessment of the 
probability of incurrence of a loss and whether the loss or range of loss was reasonably estimable 
and the development of related disclosures.
Our audit procedures included gaining an understanding of previous rulings and the status of 
ongoing lawsuits, reviewing letters addressing the matters from internal and external legal counsel, 
meeting with internal legal counsel to discuss the allegations, and obtaining a representation letter 
from management on these matters. We also evaluated the Company’s disclosures in relation to 
these matters.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
We have served as the Company's auditor since 1999.
San Jose, California
January 30, 2024Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
49.  REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Stockholders and the Board of Directors of Alphabet Inc.
Opinion on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
We have audited Alphabet Inc.’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2023, based on criteria 
established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the 
Treadway Commission (2013 framework) (the COSO criteria). In our opinion, Alphabet Inc. (the Company) maintained, 
in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2023, based on the COSO 
criteria.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United 
States) (PCAOB), the 2023 consolidated financial statements of the Company and our report dated January 30, 2024 
expressed an unqualified opinion thereon. 
Basis for Opinion
The Company’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its 
assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting included in the accompanying 
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the 
Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with 
the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal 
securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and 
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was 
maintained in all material respects. 
Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a 
material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on 
the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We 
believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding 
the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with 
generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies 
and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the 
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are 
recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting 
principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations 
of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely 
detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on 
the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. 
Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become 
inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may 
deteriorate.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
San Jose, California
January 30, 2024Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
50.  Alphabet Inc.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(in millions, except par value per share amounts)
As of December 31,
2022 2023
Assets
Current assets:
Cash and cash equivalents $ 21,879 $ 24,048 
Marketable securities  91,883  86,868 
Total cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities  113,762  110,916 
Accounts receivable, net  40,258  47,964 
Other current assets  10,775  12,650 
Total current assets  164,795  171,530 
Non-marketable securities  30,492  31,008 
Deferred income taxes  5,261  12,169 
Property and equipment, net  112,668  134,345 
Operating lease assets  14,381  14,091 
Goodwill  28,960  29,198 
Other non-current assets  8,707  10,051 
Total assets $ 365,264 $ 402,392 
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
Current liabilities:
Accounts payable $ 5,128 $ 7,493 
Accrued compensation and benefits  14,028  15,140 
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities  37,866  46,168 
Accrued revenue share  8,370  8,876 
Deferred revenue  3,908  4,137 
Total current liabilities  69,300  81,814 
Long-term debt  14,701  13,253 
Deferred revenue, non-current  599  911 
Income taxes payable, non-current  9,258  8,474 
Deferred income taxes  514  485 
Operating lease liabilities  12,501  12,460 
Other long-term liabilities  2,247  1,616 
Total liabilities  109,120  119,013 
Commitments and Contingencies (Note 10)
Stockholders’ equity:
Preferred stock, $0.001  par value per share, 100 shares authorized; no shares 
issued and outstanding  0  0 
Class A, Class B, and Class C stock and additional paid-in capital, $0.001  par value 
per share: 300,000  shares authorized (Class A 180,000 , Class B 60,000 , Class C 
60,000 ); 12,849  (Class A 5,964 , Class B 883, Class C 6,002 ) and 12,460  (Class A 
5,899 , Class B 870, Class C 5,691 ) shares issued and outstanding  68,184  76,534 
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)  (7,603)  (4,402) 
Retained earnings  195,563  211,247 
Total stockholders’ equity  256,144  283,379 
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity $ 365,264 $ 402,392 
See accompanying notes.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
51.  Alphabet Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
(in millions, except per share amounts)
 Year Ended December 31,
 2021 2022 2023
Revenues $ 257,637 $ 282,836 $ 307,394 
Costs and expenses:
Cost of revenues  110,939  126,203  133,332 
Research and development  31,562  39,500  45,427 
Sales and marketing  22,912  26,567  27,917 
General and administrative  13,510  15,724  16,425 
Total costs and expenses  178,923  207,994  223,101 
Income from operations  78,714  74,842  84,293 
Other income (expense), net  12,020  (3,514)  1,424 
Income before income taxes  90,734  71,328  85,717 
Provision for income taxes  14,701  11,356  11,922 
Net income $ 76,033 $ 59,972 $ 73,795 
Basic net income per share of Class A, Class B, and Class C stock $ 5.69 $ 4.59 $ 5.84 
Diluted net income per share of Class A, Class B, and Class C stock $ 5.61 $ 4.56 $ 5.80 
See accompanying notes.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
52.  Alphabet Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
(in millions)
 Year Ended December 31,
 2021 2022 2023
Net income $ 76,033 $ 59,972 $ 73,795 
Other comprehensive income (loss):
Change in foreign currency translation adjustment  (1,442)  (1,836)  735 
Available-for-sale investments:
Change in net unrealized gains (losses)  (1,312)  (4,720)  1,344 
Less: reclassification adjustment for net (gains) losses included in 
net income  (64)  1,007  1,168 
Net change, net of income tax benefit (expense) of $394 , $1,056 , 
and $(698)  (1,376)  (3,713)  2,512 
Cash flow hedges:
Change in net unrealized gains (losses)  716  1,275  168 
Less: reclassification adjustment for net (gains) losses included in 
net income  (154)  (1,706)  (214) 
Net change, net of income tax benefit (expense) of $(122) , $110 , 
and $2  562  (431)  (46) 
Other comprehensive income (loss)  (2,256)  (5,980)  3,201 
Comprehensive income $ 73,777 $ 53,992 $ 76,996 
See accompanying notes.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
53.  Alphabet Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
(in millions)
 Class A, Class B, Class C 
Stock and
Additional Paid-In CapitalAccumulated
Other
Comprehensive
Income (Loss)Retained
EarningsTotal
Stockholders’
Equity  Shares Amount
Balance as of December 31, 2020  13,504 $ 58,510 $ 633 $ 163,401 $ 222,544 
Stock issued  145  12  0  0  12 
Stock-based compensation expense  0  15,539  0  0  15,539 
Tax withholding related to vesting of 
restricted stock units and other  0  (10,273)  0  0  (10,273) 
Repurchases of stock  (407)  (2,324)  0  (47,950)  (50,274) 
Sale of interest in consolidated entities  0  310  0  0  310 
Net income  0  0  0  76,033  76,033 
Other comprehensive income (loss)  0  0  (2,256)  0  (2,256) 
Balance as of December 31, 2021  13,242  61,774  (1,623)  191,484  251,635 
Stock issued  137  8  0  0  8 
Stock-based compensation expense  0  19,525  0  0  19,525 
Tax withholding related to vesting of 
restricted stock units and other  0  (9,754)  0  (1)  (9,755) 
Repurchases of stock  (530)  (3,404)  0  (55,892)  (59,296) 
Sale of interest in consolidated entities  0  35  0  0  35 
Net income  0  0  0  59,972  59,972 
Other comprehensive income (loss)  0  0  (5,980)  0  (5,980) 
Balance as of December 31, 2022  12,849  68,184  (7,603)  195,563  256,144 
Stock issued  139  0  0  0  0 
Stock-based compensation expense  0  22,578  0  0  22,578 
Tax withholding related to vesting of 
restricted stock units and other  0  (10,164)  0  9  (10,155) 
Repurchases of stock  (528)  (4,064)  0  (58,120)  (62,184) 
Net income  0  0  0  73,795  73,795 
Other comprehensive income (loss)  0  0  3,201  0  3,201 
Balance as of December 31, 2023  12,460 $ 76,534 $ (4,402) $ 211,247 $ 283,379 
See accompanying notes.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
54.  Alphabet Inc.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(in millions)
 Year Ended December 31,
 2021 2022 2023
Operating activities
Net income $ 76,033 $ 59,972 $ 73,795 
Adjustments:
Depreciation of property and equipment  10,273  13,475  11,946 
Stock-based compensation expense  15,376  19,362  22,460 
Deferred income taxes  1,808  (8,081)  (7,763) 
(Gain) loss on debt and equity securities, net  (12,270)  5,519  823 
Other  1,955  3,483  4,330 
Changes in assets and liabilities, net of effects of acquisitions:
Accounts receivable, net  (9,095)  (2,317)  (7,833) 
Income taxes, net  (625)  584  523 
Other assets  (1,846)  (5,046)  (2,143) 
Accounts payable  283  707  664 
Accrued expenses and other liabilities  7,304  3,915  3,937 
Accrued revenue share  1,682  (445)  482 
Deferred revenue  774  367  525 
Net cash provided by operating activities  91,652  91,495  101,746 
Investing activities
Purchases of property and equipment  (24,640)  (31,485)  (32,251) 
Purchases of marketable securities  (135,196)  (78,874)  (77,858) 
Maturities and sales of marketable securities  128,294  97,822  86,672 
Purchases of non-marketable securities  (2,838)  (2,531)  (3,027) 
Maturities and sales of non-marketable securities  934  150  947 
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired, and purchases of intangible assets  (2,618)  (6,969)  (495) 
Other investing activities  541  1,589  (1,051) 
Net cash used in investing activities  (35,523)  (20,298)  (27,063) 
Financing activities
Net payments related to stock-based award activities  (10,162)  (9,300)  (9,837) 
Repurchases of stock  (50,274)  (59,296)  (61,504) 
Proceeds from issuance of debt, net of costs  20,199  52,872  10,790 
Repayments of debt  (21,435)  (54,068)  (11,550) 
Proceeds from sale of interest in consolidated entities, net  310  35  8 
Net cash used in financing activities  (61,362)  (69,757)  (72,093) 
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents  (287)  (506)  (421) 
Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents  (5,520)  934  2,169 
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period  26,465  20,945  21,879 
Cash and cash equivalents at end of period $ 20,945 $ 21,879 $ 24,048 
Supplemental disclosures of cash flow information
Cash paid for income taxes, net of refunds $ 13,412 $ 18,892 $ 19,164 
See accompanying notes.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
55.  Alphabet Inc.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Note 1.    Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Nature of Operations
Google was incorporate d in California in September 1998 and re-incorporated in the State of Delaware in August 
2003. In 2015, we implemented a holding company reorganization, and as a result, Alphabet Inc. ("Alphabet") became 
the successor issuer to Google.
We generate revenues by delivering relevant, cost-effective online advertising; cloud-based solutions that provide 
enterprise customers with infrastructure and platform services as well as communication and collaboration tools; sales 
of other products and services, such as  fees received for consumer subscription-based products, apps and in-app 
purchases, and devices .
Basis of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements of Alphabet include the accounts of Alphabet and entities consolid ated 
under the variable interest and voting models. Intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated.
Use of Estimates
Preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and 
assumptions that affect the amounts reported and disclosed in the financial statements and the accompanying notes. 
Actual results could differ materially from these estimates due to uncertainties. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our 
estimates, including those related to the allowance for credit losses; content licenses;  contingent liabilities; fair values 
of financial instruments and goodwill; income taxes; inventory; and useful lives of property and equipment,  among 
others. We base our estimates on assumptions, both historical and forward looking, that are believed to be reasonable, 
and the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities.
In January 2023, we completed an assessment of the useful lives of our servers and network equipment and 
adjusted the estimated useful life of our servers from four years  to six years  and the estimated useful life of certain 
network equipment from five years  to six years . This change in accounting estimate was effective beginning in fiscal 
year 2023. Based on the carrying value of servers and certain network equipment as of December 31, 2022, and those 
placed in service during the year ended December 31, 2023, the effect of this change in estimate was a reduction in 
depreciation expense of $3.9 billion  and an increase in net income of $3.0 billion , or $0.24  per basic and $0.24  per 
diluted share,  for the year ended December 31, 2023.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, and 
the collectibility of an amount that we expect in exchange for those goods or services is probable.  Sales and other 
similar taxes are excluded from revenues. 
Advertising Revenues
We generate advertising revenues primarily by delivering advertising on:
•Google Search and other properties, including revenues from traffic generated by search distribution partners 
who use Google.com as their default search in browsers, toolbars, etc. and other Google owned and operated 
properties like Gmail, Google Maps, and Google Play;
•YouTube properties; and
•Google Network properties, including revenues from Google Network properties participating in AdMob, 
AdSense, and Google Ad Manager.
Our customers generally purchase advertising inventory through Google Ads, Google Ad Manager, Google 
Display & Video 360, and Google Marketing Platform, among others.
We offer advertising by delivering both performance and brand advertising. We recognize revenues for 
performance advertising when a user engages with the advertisement . For brand advertising, we recognize revenues 
when the ad is displayed, or a user views the ad.
For ads placed on Google Network properties, we evaluate whether we are the principal  (i.e., report revenues on 
a gross basis) or agent (i.e., report revenues on a net basis). Generally, we report advertising revenues for ads placed 
on Google Network properties on a gross basis, that is, the amounts billed to our customers are recorded as revenues, Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
56.  and amounts paid to Google Network partners are recorded as cost of revenues. Where we are the principal, we 
control the advertising inventory before it is transferred to our customers. Our control is evidenced by our sole ability to 
monetize the advertising inventory before it is transferred to our customers and is further supported by us being 
primarily responsible to our customers and having a level of discretion in establishing pricing.
Google  Subscriptions, Platforms, and Device s
Google subscriptions, platforms, and devices revenues consist of revenues from:
•consumer subscriptions, which primarily include revenues from YouTube services, such YouTube TV, YouTube 
Music and Premium, and NFL Sunday Ticket, as well as Google One;
•platforms, which primarily include revenues from Google Play from the sales of apps and in-app purchases;
•devices, which primarily include sales of the Pixel family of devices; and
•other products and services.
Subscription revenues are recognized ratably over the period of the subscription, primarily monthly . We report 
revenues from Google Play app sales and in-app purchases on a net basis, because our performance obligation is to 
facilitate a transaction between app developers and end users, for which we earn a service fee. 
Google Cloud Revenues
Google Cloud revenues consist of revenues from:
•Google Cloud Platform, which generates consumption-based fees and subscriptions for infrastructure, 
platform, and other services. These services provide access to solutions such as cybersecurity, databases, 
analytics, and AI offerings including our AI infrastructure, Vertex AI platform, and Duet AI for Google Cloud;
•Google Workspace, which includes subscriptions for cloud-based communication and collaboration tools for 
enterprises, such as Calendar, Gmail, Docs, Drive, and Meet, with integrated features like Duet AI in Google 
Workspace; and
•other enterprise services.
Our cloud services are generally provided on either a consumption or subscription basis and may have contract 
terms longer than a year. Revenues related to cloud services provided on a consumption basis are recognized when 
the customer utilizes the services, based on the quantity of services consumed. Revenues related to cloud services 
provided on a subscription basis are recognized ratably over the contract term as the customer receives and 
consumes the benefits of the cloud services.
Arrangements with Multiple Performance Obligations
Our contracts with customers may include multiple performance obligations. For such arrangements, we allocate 
revenues to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. We generally determine 
standalone selling prices based on the prices charged to customers.
Customer Incentives and Credits
Certain customers receive cash-based incentives or credits, which are accounted for as variable consideration. 
We estimate these amounts based on the expected amount to be provided to customers and reduce revenues. We 
believe that there will not be significant changes to our estimates of variable consideration.
Sales Commissions
We expense sales commissions when incurred when the period of the expected benefit is one year or less. We 
recognize an asset for certain sales commissions and  amortize i f the expected benefit period is greater than one year. 
These costs are recorded within sales and marketing expenses.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues consists of TAC and other costs of revenues.
•TAC includes: 
◦amounts paid to our distribution partners who make available our search access points and services. 
Our distribution partners include browser providers, mobile carriers, original equipment manufacturers, 
and software developers; and
◦amounts paid to Google Network partners primarily for ads displayed on their properties.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
57.  •Other cost of revenues includes:
◦compensation expense related to our data centers and other operations such as content review and 
customer and product support;
◦content acquisition costs, which are payments to content providers from whom we license video and 
other content for distribution on YouTube and Google Play (we pay fees to these content providers 
based on revenues generated or a flat fee);
◦depreciation expense related to our technical infrastructure; and
◦inventory and other costs related to the devices we sell.
Software Development  Costs
We expense software development costs, including costs to develop software products or the software 
component of products to be sold, leased, or marketed to external users, before technological feasibility is reached. 
Technological feasibility is typically reached shortly before the release of such products. As a result, development costs 
that meet the criteria for capitalization were not material for the periods presented.
Software development costs also include costs to develop software to be used solely to meet internal needs and 
cloud-based applications used to deliver our services. We capitalize development costs related to these software 
applications once the preliminary project stage is complete and it is probable that the project will be completed and the 
software will be used to perform the function intended. Costs capitalized for developing such software applications 
were not material for the periods presented.
Stock-based Compensation  
Stock-based compensation (SBC)  primarily consists of Alphabet restricted stock units (RSUs). RSUs are equity 
classified and measured at the fair market value of the underlying stock at the grant date. We recognize RSU expense 
using the straight-line attribution method over the requisite service period and account for forfeitures as they occur.
For RSUs, shares are issued on the vesting dates net of the applicable statutory income tax withholding to be 
paid by us on behalf of our employees. As a result, fewer shares are issued than the number of RSUs outstanding, and 
the income tax withholding is recorded as a reduction to additional paid-in capital.
Additionally, SBC includes other stock-based awards, such as performance stock units (PSUs) that include 
market conditions and awards that may be settled in cash or the stock of certain Other Bet companies . PSUs and  
certain awards granted by Other Bet companies  are equity classified and expense is recognized over the requisite 
service period. Certain awards granted by Other Bet companies are liability classified and remeasured at fair value 
through settlement. The fair value of awards granted by Other Bet companies is based on the equity valuation of the 
respective Other Bet company.
Advertising and Promotional Expenses
We expense advertising and promotional costs in the period in which they are incurred.  For the years ended 
December 31, 2021 , 2022 , and 2023 , advertising and promotional expenses totaled approximately $7.9 billion , $9.2 
billion , and $8.7 billion , respectively.
Performance Fees
Performance fees refer to compensation arrangements with payouts based on realized returns from certain 
investments. We record compensation expense based on the estimated payouts on an ongoing basis, which may 
result in expense recognized before investment returns are realized and compensation is paid and may require the use 
of unobservable inputs . Performance fees are recorded as a component of OI&E.
Fair Value Measurements 
Fair value is an exit price, representing the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a 
liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. As such, fair value is a market-based measurement that 
is determined based on assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or a liability. Assets and 
liabilities recorded at fair value are measured and classified in accordance with a three-tier fair value hierarchy based 
on the observability of the inputs available in the market used to measure fair value:
Level 1 - Observable inputs that reflect quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active 
markets.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
58.  Level 2 - Inputs that are based upon quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets, quoted prices for 
identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active, and model-based valuation techniques for which all 
significant inputs are observable in the market or can be derived from observable market data. Where applicable, 
these models project future cash flows and discount the future amounts to a present value using market-based 
observable inputs including interest rate curves, foreign exchange rates, and credit ratings.
Level 3 - Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activities.
The fair value hierarchy requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of 
unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. The determination of fair value involves the use of appropriate 
valuation methods and relevant inputs into valuation models.
Our financial assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis include cash equivalents, 
marketable securities, derivative financial instruments, and certain non-marketable debt securities. Our financial assets 
measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis include non-marketable equity securities. Other financial assets and 
liabilities are carried at cost with fair value disclosed, if required.
We measure certain other instruments, including SBC awards settled in the stock of O ther Bet companies, and 
certain assets and liabilities acquired in a business combination, also at fair value on a nonrecurring basis. 
Financial Instruments
Our financial instruments include cash, cash equivalents, marketable and non-marketable securities, derivative 
financial instruments and accounts receivable.
Credit Risks
We are subject to credit risk primarily from cash equivalents, marketable debt securities, derivative financial 
instruments, including foreign exchange contracts, and accounts receivable.  We manage our credit risk exposure 
through timely assessment of our counterparty creditworthiness, credit limits and use of collateral management. 
Foreign exchange contracts are transacted with various financial institutions with high credit standing. Accounts 
receivable are typically unsecured and are derived from revenues earned from customers located around the world. 
We manage our credit risk exposure by performing ongoing evaluations to determine customer credit and we limit the 
amount of credit we extend. We generally do not require collateral from our customers.
Cash Equivalents
We invest excess cash primarily in government bonds, corporate debt securities, mortgage-backed and asset-
backed securities, time deposits, and money market funds.
Marketable Securities
We classify all marketable debt securities that have effective maturities of three months or less from the date of 
purchase as cash equivalents and those with effective maturities of greater than three months as marketable securities 
on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. We determine the appropriate classification of our investments in marketable 
debt securities at the time of purchase and reevaluate such designation at each balance sheet date. We have 
classified and accounted for our marketable debt securities as available-for-sale. After consideration of our risk versus 
reward objectives, as well as our liquidity requirements, we may sell these debt securities prior to their effective 
maturities. As we view these securities as available to support current operations, we classify highly liquid securities 
with maturities beyond 12 months as current assets under the caption marketable securities on the Consolidated 
Balance Sheets. We carry these securities at fair value, and report the unrealized gains and losses, net of taxes, as a 
component of stockholders’ equity, except for the changes in allowance for expected credit losses, which are recorded 
in OI&E. For certain marketable debt securities we have elected the fair value option, for which changes in fair value 
are recorded in OI&E. We determine any realized gains or losses on the sale of marketable debt securities on a 
specific identification method, and we record such gains and losses as a component of OI&E .
Our investments in marketable equity securities are measured at fair value with the related gains and losses, 
including unrealized, recognized in OI&E.  We classify our marketable equity securities subject to long-term lock-up 
restrictions beyond 12 months as other non-current assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Non-Marketable Securities
Non-marketable securities primarily consist of equity securities . We account for non-marketable equity securities 
through which we exercise significant influence but do not have control over the investee under the equity method. All 
other non-marketable equity securities that we hold are primarily accounted for under the measurement alternative. 
Under the measurement alternative, the carrying value is measured at cost, less any impairment, plus or minus Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
59.  changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for identical or similar investments of the 
same issuer.  Adjustments are determined primarily based on a market approach  as of the transaction date and are 
recorded as a component of OI&E.
Non-marketable securities that do not have effective contractual maturity dates are classified as other non-
current assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Derivative Financial Instruments
See Note 3  for the accounting policy pertaining to derivative financial instruments. 
Accounts Receivable
Our payment terms for accounts receivable vary by the types and locations of our customers and the products or 
services offered. The term between invoicing and when payment is due is not significant. For certain products or 
services and customers, we require payment before the products or services are delivered to the customer. 
Additionally, accounts receivable includes amounts for services performed in advance of the right to invoice the 
customer.
We maintain an allowance for credit losses for accounts receivable, which is recorded as an offset to accounts 
receivable, and changes in such are classified as general and administrative expense in the Consolidated Statements 
of Income. We assess collectibility by reviewing accounts receivable on a collective basis where similar characteristics 
exist and on an individual basis when we identify specific customers with known disputes or collectibility issues. In 
determining the amount of the allowance for credit losses, we consider historical collectibility based on past due status 
and make judgments about the creditworthiness of customers based on ongoing credit evaluations. We also consider 
customer-specific information, current market conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts of future economic 
conditions.
Other
Our financial instruments also include debt and equity investments in companies with which we also entered into 
commercial arrangements at or near the same time.  For these transactions, judgment is required in assessing the 
substance of the arrangements, including assessing whether the components of the arrangements should be 
accounted for as separate transactions under the applicable GAAP, and determining the value of the components of 
the arrangements, including the fair value of the investments. Additionally, if our investment in such companies 
becomes impaired, any remaining performance obligations would be reassessed and may be reduced.
Impairment of Investments
We periodically review our debt and non-marketable equity securities for impairment. 
For debt securities in an unrealized loss position, we determine whether a credit loss exists. The credit loss is 
estimated by considering available information relevant to the collectibility of the security and information about past 
events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Any credit loss is recorded as a charge to OI&E, 
not to exceed the amount of the unrealized loss. Unrealized losses other than the credit loss are recognized in AOCI. If 
we have an intent to sell, or if it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell a debt security in an unrealized 
loss position before recovery of its amortized cost basis, we will write down the security to its fair value and record the 
corresponding charge as a component of OI&E. 
For non-marketable equity securities, including equity method investments, we consider whether impairment 
indicators exist by evaluating the companies' financial and liquidity position and access to capital resources, among 
other indicators. If the assessment indicates that the investment is impaired, we write down the investment to its fair 
value by recording the corresponding charge as a component of OI&E. We prepare quantitative measurements of the 
fair value of our equity investments using a market approach or an income approach.
Inventory
Inventory consists primarily of finished goods and is stated at the lower of cost and net realizable value. Cost is 
computed using the first-in, first-out method.
Variable Interest Entities
We determine at the inception of each arrangement whether an entity in which we have made an investment or in 
which we have other variable interests is considered a variable interest entity (VIE). We consolidate VIEs when we are 
the primary beneficiary. We are the primary beneficiary of a VIE when we have the power to direct activities that most 
significantly affect the economic performance of the VIE and have the obligation to absorb the majority of their losses Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
60.  or benefits. If we are not the primary beneficiary in a VIE, we account for the investment or other variable interests in a 
VIE in accordance with applicable GAAP.
Periodically, we assess whether any changes in our interest or relationship with the entity affect our determination 
of whether the entity is a VIE and, if so, whether we are the primary beneficiary. 
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment includes the following categories: land and buildings, information technology assets, 
construction in progress, leasehold improvements, and furniture and fixtures. Land and buildings include land, offices, 
data centers, and related building improvements. Information technology assets include servers and network 
equipment. Construction in progress is the construction or development of property and equipment that have not yet 
been placed in service. 
Property and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is recorded using the 
straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which we regularly evaluate. Land is not depreciated. 
We depreciate buildings over periods of seven  to 25 years . We depreciate information technology assets generally 
over a period of six years  for servers and network equipment.  We depreciate leasehold improvements over the shorter 
of the remaining lease term or the estimated useful lives of the assets. Depreciation for buildings, information 
technology assets, leasehold improvements, and furniture and fixtures commences once they are ready for our 
intended use.
Goodwill
We allocate goodwill to reporting units based on the expected benefit from the business combination. We 
evaluate our reporting units periodically, as well as when changes in our operating segments occur. For changes in 
reporting units, we reassign goodwill using a relative fair value allocation approach. We test our goodwill for 
impairment at least annually, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset may be 
impaired. Goodwill impairments were not material for the periods presented.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Our lease agreements generally contain lease and non-
lease components. Payments under our lease arrangements are primarily fixed. Non-lease components primarily 
include payments for maintenance and utilities. We combine fixed payments for non-lease components with lease 
payments and account for them together as a single lease component which increases the amount of our lease assets 
and liabilities.
Certain lease agreements contain variable payments, which are expensed as incurred and not included in the 
lease assets and liabilities. These amounts  primarily  include  payments affected by the Consumer Price Index, and 
payments for maintenance and utilities.
Lease assets and liabilities are recognized at the present value of the future lease payments at the lease 
commencement date. The interest rate used to determine the present value of the future lease payments is our 
incremental borrowing rate, because the interest rate implicit in our leases is not readily determinable. Our incremental 
borrowing rate is estimated to approximate the interest rate on a collateralized basis with similar terms and payments, 
and in economic environments where the leased asset is located. Our lease terms include periods under options to 
extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. We generally use the 
base, non-cancelable, lease term when determining the lease assets and liabilities. Lease assets also include any 
prepaid lease payments and lease incentives.
Operating lease assets and liabilities are included on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. The current portion of our 
operating lease liabilities is included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, and the long-term portion is 
included in operating lease liabilities. Finance lease assets are included in property and equipment, net. Finance lease 
liabilities are included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities or long-term debt.
Operating lease expense (excluding variable lease costs) is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease 
term.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review lease s, property and equipment, and intangible assets,  excluding goodwill, for impairment when 
events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount may not be recoverable. The evaluation is performed 
at the lowest level of identifiable cash flows independent of other assets. We measure recoverability of these assets by 
comparing the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows that the assets or the asset group are expected Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
61.  to generate. If the carrying value of the assets or asset group is not recoverable, the impairment recognized is 
measured as the amount by which the carrying value exceeds its fair value. 
Income T axes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method, under which we recognize the amount of taxes 
payable or refundable for the current year and deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences of 
events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. We measure current and deferred tax 
assets and liabilities based on provisions of enacted tax law. We evaluate the likelihood of future realization  of our 
deferred tax assets based on all available evidence and establish a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets 
when it is more likely than not that they will not be realized or release a valuation allowance to increase deferred tax 
assets when it is more likely than not that they will be realized. We have elected to account for the tax effects of the 
global intangible low tax Income provision as a current period expense.
We recognize the financial statement effects of a tax position when it is more likely than not that, based on 
technical merits, the position will be sustained upon examination. The tax benefits of the position recognized in the 
financial statements are then measured based on the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely to be 
realized upon settlement with a taxing authority. In addition, we recognize interest and penalties related to 
unrecognized tax benefits as a component of the income tax provision.
Business Combinations
We include the results of operations of the businesses that we acquire as of the acquisition date. We allocate the 
purchase price of the acquisitions to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values, 
except for revenue contracts acquired, which are recognized in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. The 
excess of the purchase price over the fair values of identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. 
Acquisition-related expenses are recognized separately from the business combination and are expensed as incurred.
Foreign Currency
We translate the financial statements of our international subsidiaries to U.S. dollars using month-end exchange 
rates for assets and liabilities, and average rates for the annual period derived from month-end exchange rates for 
revenues, costs, and expenses. We record translation gains and losses in AOCI as a component of stockholders’ 
equity. We reflect net foreign exchange transaction gains and losses resulting from the conversion of the transaction 
currency to functional currency as a component of foreign currency exchange gain (loss) in OI&E .
Recent  Accounting Pronouncements
In November 2023, the Financial Standards Accounting Board (FASB) issued Accounting Standards Update 
(ASU) 2023-07 "Segment Reporting (Topic 280):Improvements to Reportable Segment Disclosures" which expands 
annual and interim disclosure requirements for reportable segments, primarily through enhanced disclosures about 
significant segment expenses. ASU 2023-07  is effective for our annual periods beginning  January 1, 2024, and for 
interim periods beginning January 1, 2025, with early adoption permitted. We  are currently evaluating the potential 
effect that the updated standard will have on our financial statement disclosures.
In December 2023, the FASB issued ASU 2023-09 "Income Taxes (Topics 740): Improvements to Income Tax 
Disclosures"  to expand the disclosure requirements for income taxes, specifically related to the rate reconciliation and 
income taxes paid. ASU 2023-09  is effective for our annual periods beginning J anuary 1, 2025, with early adoption 
permitted. W e are currently evaluating the potential effect that the updated standard will have on our financial 
statement disclosures.
Prior Period Reclassifications
Certain amounts in prior periods have been reclassified to conform with current period presentation.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
62.  Note 2.    Revenues  
Disaggregated Revenues
The following table presents revenues disaggregated by type (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
2021 2022 2023
Google Search & other $ 148,951 $ 162,450 $ 175,033 
YouTube ads  28,845  29,243  31,510 
Google Network  31,701  32,780  31,312 
Google advertising  209,497  224,473  237,855 
Google subscriptions, platforms, and devices  28,032  29,055  34,688 
Google Services total  237,529  253,528  272,543 
Google Cloud  19,206  26,280  33,088 
Other Bets  753  1,068  1,527 
Hedging gains (losses)  149  1,960  236 
Total revenues $ 257,637 $ 282,836 $ 307,394 
No individual customer or groups of affiliated customers represented more than 10% of our revenues in 2021 , 
2022 , or 2023 . 
The following table presents revenues disaggregated by geography, based on the addresses of our customers (in 
millions):
Year Ended December 31,
 2021 2022 2023
United States $ 117,854  46 % $ 134,814  48 % $ 146,286  47 %
EMEA(1) 79,107  31  82,062  29  91,038  30 
APAC(1) 46,123  18  47,024  16  51,514  17 
Other Americas(1) 14,404  5  16,976  6  18,320  6 
Hedging gains (losses)  149  0  1,960  1  236  0 
Total revenues $ 257,637  100 % $ 282,836  100 % $ 307,394  100 %
(1)Regions represent Europe, the Middle East, and Africa (EMEA); Asia-Pacific (APAC); and Canada and Latin America ("Other 
Americas").
Revenue Backlog
As of December 31, 2023 , we had $74.1 billion  of remaining performance obligations (“revenue backlog”), 
primarily related to Google Cloud. Our revenue backlog represents commitments in customer contracts for future 
services that have not yet been recognized as revenue. The estimated revenue backlog and timing of revenue 
recognition for these commitments is largely driven by our ability to deliver in accordance with relevant contract terms 
and when our customers utilize services . We expect to recognize approximately half of the revenue backlog as 
revenues over the next 24 months  with the remaining to be recognized thereafter. Revenue backlog includes related 
deferred revenue currently recorded as well as amounts that will be invoiced in future periods, and excludes contracts 
with an original expected term of one year or less and cancellable contracts.
Deferred Revenues
We record deferred revenues when cash payments are received or due in advance of our performance, including 
amounts which are refundable. Deferred revenues primarily relate to Google Cloud and Google subscriptions, 
platforms, and devices . Total deferred revenue as of December 31, 2022  was $4.5 billion , of which $2.4 billion  was 
recognized as revenues for the year ended December 31, 2023 .
Note 3.    Financial Instruments  
Fair Value Measurements
Investments Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
Cash, cash equivalents, and marketable equity securities are measured at fair value and classified within Level 1 Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
63.  and Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy, because we use quoted prices for identical assets in active markets or inputs 
that are based upon quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets.
Debt securities are measured at fair value and classified within Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy, because we use 
quoted market prices to the extent available or alternative pricing sources and models utilizing market observable 
inputs to determine fair value. For certain marketable debt securities, we have elected the fair value option for which 
changes in fair value are recorded in OI&E. The fair value option was elected for these securities to align with the 
unrealized gains and losses from related derivative contracts.
The following tables summarize our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities measured at fair value on 
a recurring basis (in millions):
As of December 31, 2022
Fair Value 
HierarchyAdjusted 
CostGross 
Unrealized 
GainsGross 
Unrealized 
Losses Fair ValueCash and 
Cash 
EquivalentsMarketable 
Securities
Fair value changes 
recorded in other 
comprehensive income
Time deposits Level 2 $ 5,297 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,297 $ 5,293 $ 4 
Government bonds Level 2 41,036  64  (2,045)  39,055  283  38,772 
Corporate debt securities Level 2 28,578  8  (1,569)  27,017  1  27,016 
Mortgage-backed and 
asset-backed securities Level 2 16,176  5  (1,242)  14,939  0  14,939 
Total investments with 
fair value change 
reflected in other 
comprehensive 
income(1)$ 91,087 $ 77 $ (4,856) $ 86,308 $ 5,577 $ 80,731 
Fair value adjustments 
recorded in net income
Money market funds Level 1 $ 7,234 $ 7,234 $ 0 
Current marketable 
equity securities(2)Level 1
 4,013  0  4,013 
Mutual funds Level 2  339  0  339 
Government bonds Level 2  1,877  440  1,437 
Corporate debt securities Level 2  3,744  65  3,679 
Mortgage-backed and 
asset-backed securitiesLevel 2
 1,686  2  1,684 
Total investments with 
fair value change 
recorded in net 
income $ 18,893 $ 7,741 $ 11,152 
Cash  0  8,561  0 
Total $ 91,087 $ 77 $ (4,856) $ 105,201 $ 21,879 $ 91,883 
(1)Represents gross unrealized gains and losses for debt securities recorded to AOCI.
(2)The long-term portion of marketable equity securities (subject to long-term lock-up restrictions) of $803 million  as of 
December 31, 2022  is included within other non-current assets.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
64.  As of December 31, 2023
Fair Value 
HierarchyAdjusted 
CostGross 
Unrealized 
GainsGross 
Unrealized 
Losses Fair ValueCash and 
Cash 
EquivalentsMarketable 
Securities
Fair value changes 
recorded in other 
comprehensive income
Time deposits Level 2 $ 2,628 $ 0 $ 0 $ 2,628 $ 2,628 $ 0 
Government bonds Level 2  38,106  233  (679)  37,660  1,993  35,667 
Corporate debt securities Level 2  22,457  112  (637)  21,932  0  21,932 
Mortgage-backed and 
asset-backed securities Level 2 17,243  88  (634)  16,697  0  16,697 
Total investments with 
fair value change 
reflected in other 
comprehensive 
income(1)$ 80,434 $ 433 $ (1,950) $ 78,917 $ 4,621 $ 74,296 
Fair value adjustments 
recorded in net income
Money market funds Level 1 $ 6,480 $ 6,480 $ 0 
Current marketable 
equity securities(2)Level 1 4,282  0 4,282
Mutual funds Level 2 311  0 311
Government bonds Level 2 1,952  347 1,605
Corporate debt securities Level 2 3,782  91 3,691
Mortgage-backed and 
asset-backed securitiesLevel 2
2,683  0 2,683
Total investments with 
fair value change 
recorded in net 
income $ 19,490 $ 6,918 $ 12,572 
Cash  0  12,509  0 
Total $ 80,434 $ 433 $ (1,950) $ 98,407 $ 24,048 $ 86,868 
(1)Represents gross unrealized gains and losses for debt securities recorded to AOCI.
(2)The long-term portion of marketable equity securities (subject to long-term lock-up restrictions) of $1.4 billion  as of 
December 31, 2023  is included within other non-current assets.
Investments Measured at Fair Value on a Nonrecurring Basis
Our non-marketable equity securities are investments in privately held companies without readily determinable 
market values. The carrying value of our non-marketable equity securities is adjusted to fair value upon observable 
transactions for identical or similar investments of the same issuer or impairment. Non-marketable equity securities 
that have been remeasured during the period based on observable transactions are classified within Level 2 or Level 3 
in the fair value hierarchy because we estimate the value based on valuation methods, including option  pricing models, 
market comparable approach, and common stock equivalent method,  which may include a combination of the 
observable transaction price at the transaction date and other unobservable inputs including volatility,  expected time to 
exit, risk free rate, and the rights, and obligations of the securities we hold.  These inputs significantly vary based on 
investment type. The fair value of non-marketable equity securities that have been remeasured due to impairment are 
classified within Level 3.
As of  December 31, 2023 , the carrying value of our non-marketable equity securities was $28.8 billion , of which 
$13.7 billion  were remeasured at fair value during the year ended December 31, 2023 , and primarily classified within 
Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy at the time of measurement. Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
65.  Debt Securities
The following table summarizes the estimated fair value of investments in available-for-sale marketable debt 
securities by effective contractual maturity dates (in millions):
As of December 31, 
2023
Due in one year or less $ 11,231 
Due in one year through five years  41,477 
Due in five years through 10 years  15,351 
Due after 10 years  14,216 
Total $ 82,275 
The following tables present fair values and gross unrealized losses recorded to AOCI, aggregated by 
investment category and the length of time that individual securities have been in a continuous loss position (in 
millions):
 As of December 31, 2022
 Less than 12 Months 12 Months or Greater Total
 Fair ValueUnrealized
Loss Fair ValueUnrealized
Loss Fair ValueUnrealized
Loss
Government bonds $ 21,039 $ (1,004) $ 13,438 $ (1,041) $ 34,477 $ (2,045) 
Corporate debt securities  11,228  (440)  15,125  (1,052)  26,353  (1,492) 
Mortgage-backed and asset-backed 
securities  7,725  (585)  6,964  (657)  14,689  (1,242) 
Total $ 39,992 $ (2,029) $ 35,527 $ (2,750) $ 75,519 $ (4,779) 
 As of December 31, 2023
 Less than 12 Months 12 Months or Greater Total
 Fair ValueUnrealized
Loss Fair ValueUnrealized
Loss Fair ValueUnrealized
Loss
Government bonds $ 1,456 $ (22) $ 13,897 $ (657) $ 15,353 $ (679) 
Corporate debt securities  827  (5)  15,367  (592)  16,194  (597) 
Mortgage-backed and asset-backed 
securities  2,945  (26)  7,916  (608)  10,861  (634) 
Total $ 5,228 $ (53) $ 37,180 $ (1,857) $ 42,408 $ (1,910) 
We determine realized gains or losses on the sale or extinguishment of debt securities on a specific identification 
method. The following table summarizes gains and losses for debt securities, reflected as a component of OI&E (in 
millions): 
Year Ended December 31,
 2021 2022 2023
Unrealized gain (loss) on fair value option debt securities $ (122) $ (557) $ 386 
Gross realized gain on debt securities  432  103  182 
Gross realized loss on debt securities  (329)  (1,588)  (1,833) 
(Increase) decrease in allowance for credit losses  (91)  (22)  50 
Total gain (loss) on debt securities recognized in other income 
(expense), net $ (110) $ (2,064) $ (1,215) Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
66.  Equity Investments
The carrying value of equity securities is measured as the total initial cost plus the cumulative net gain (loss). 
Gains and losses, including impairments , are included as a component of OI&E in the Consolidated Statements of 
Income. See  Note 7  for further details on OI&E.
The carrying values for marketable and non-marketable equity securities are summarized below (in millions):
As of December 31, 2022 As of December 31, 2023
Marketable 
Equity 
SecuritiesNon-Marketable 
Equity 
Securities TotalMarketable 
Equity 
SecuritiesNon-Marketable 
Equity 
Securities Total
Total initial cost $ 5,764 $ 16,157 $ 21,921 $ 5,418 $ 17,616 $ 23,034 
Cumulative net 
gain (loss)(1) (608)  12,372  11,764  555  11,150  11,705 
Carrying value $ 5,156 $ 28,529 $ 33,685 $ 5,973 $ 28,766 $ 34,739 
(1)Non-marketable equity securities cumulative net gain (loss) is comprised of $16.8 billion  gains and $4.5 billion  losses 
(including impairments) as of December 31, 2022  and $18.1 billion  gains and $6.9 billion  losses (including impairments) as of 
December 31, 2023 .
Gains and Losses on Marketable and Non-marketable Equity Securities
Gains and losses (including impairments), net, for marketable and non-marketable equity securities included in 
OI&E are summarized below (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
 2021 2022 2023
Realized net gain (loss) on equity securities sold during the 
period $ 1,196 $ (442) $ 690 
Unrealized net gain (loss) on marketable equity securities  1,335  (3,242)  790 
Unrealized net gain (loss) on non-marketable equity securities(1) 9,849  229  (1,088) 
Total gain (loss) on equity securities in other income 
(expense), net $ 12,380 $ (3,455) $ 392 
(1)Unrealized gain (loss) on non-marketable equity securities accounted for under the measurement alternative is comprised of 
$10.0 billion , $3.3 billion , and $1.8 billion  of upward adjustments as of December 31, 2021 , 2022 , and 2023 , respectively, and 
$122 million , $3.0 billion , and $2.9 billion  of downward adjustments (including impairments) as of December 31, 2021 , 2022 , 
and 2023 , respectively.
In the table above, realized net gain (loss) on equity securities sold during the period reflects the difference 
between the sale proceeds and the carrying value of the equity securities at the beginning of the period or the 
purchase date, if later.
Cumulative net gains (losses) on equity securities sold during the period, which is summarized in the following 
table (in millions), represents the total net gains (losses) recognized after the initial purchase date of the equity security 
sold during the period. While these net gains (losses) may have been reflected in periods prior to the period of sale, we 
believe they are important supplemental information as they reflect the economic net gains (losses) on the securities 
sold during the period. Cumulative net gains (losses) are calculated as the difference between the sale price and the 
initial purchase price for the equity security sold during the period.
Equity Securities Sold During the Year 
Ended December 31,
 2022 2023
Total sale price $ 1,784 $ 1,981 
Total initial cost  937  1,512 
Cumulative net gains (losses) $ 847 $ 469 
Equity  Securities Accounted for Under the Equity Method
As of December 31, 2022  and 2023 , equity securities accounted for under the equity method had a carrying value 
of approximately $1.5 billion  and $1.7 billion , respectively. Our share of gains and losses, including impairments, are 
included as a component of OI&E, in the Consolidated Statements of Income. See Note 7  for further details on OI&E.  Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
67.  Derivative Financial Instruments
We use derivative instruments to manage risks relating to our ongoing business operations. The primary risk 
managed is foreign exchange risk. We use foreign currency contracts to reduce the risk that our cash flows, earnings, 
and investment in foreign subsidiaries will be adversely affected by foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. We 
also enter into derivative instruments to partially offset our exposure to other risks and enhance investment returns.
We recognize derivative instruments in the Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value and classify the derivatives 
primarily within Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy. We present our collar contracts (an option strategy comprised of a 
combination of purchased and written options) at net fair values and present all other derivatives at gross fair values. 
The accounting treatment for derivatives is based on the intended use and hedge designation.
Cash Flow Hedges
We designate foreign currency forward and option contracts (including collars) as cash flow hedges to hedge 
certain forecasted revenue transactions denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. These contracts have 
maturities of 24 months  or less.
Cash flow hedge amounts included in the assessment of hedge effectiveness are deferred in AOCI and 
subsequently reclassified to revenue when the hedged item is recognized in earnings. We exclude forward points and 
time value from our assessment of hedge effectiveness and amortize them on a straight-line basis over the life of the 
hedging instrument in revenues. The difference between fair value changes of the excluded component and the 
amount amortized to revenues is recorded in AOCI.
As of December 31, 2023 , the net accumulated gain on our foreign currency cash flow hedges before tax effect 
was $47 million , which is expected to be reclassified from AOCI into revenues within the next 12 months.
Fair Value Hedges
We designate foreign currency forward contracts as fair value hedges to hedge foreign currency risks for our 
marketable securities denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Fair value hedge amounts included in the 
assessment of hedge effectiveness are recognized in OI&E, along with the offsetting gains and losses of the related 
hedged items. We exclude forward points from the assessment of hedge effectiveness and recognize changes in the 
excluded component in OI&E.
Net Investment Hedges
We designate foreign currency forward contracts as net investment hedges to hedge the foreign currency risks 
related to our investment in foreign subsidiaries. Net investment hedge amounts included in the assessment of hedge 
effectiveness are recognized in AOCI along with the foreign currency translation adjustment. We exclude forward 
points from the assessment of hedge effectiveness and recognize changes in the excluded component in OI&E.
Other Derivatives
We enter into foreign currency forward and option contracts that are not designated as hedging instruments to 
hedge intercompany transactions and other monetary assets or liabilities denominated in currencies other than the 
functional currency of a subsidiary. Gains and losses on these derivatives that are not designated as accounting 
hedges are primarily recorded in OI&E along with the foreign currency gains and losses on monetary assets and 
liabilities.
We also use derivatives not designated as hedging instruments to manage risks relating to interest rates, 
commodity prices, credit exposures, and to enhance investment returns.  From time to time, we enter into derivatives to 
hedge the market price risk on certain of our marketable equity securities. Gains and losses arising from other 
derivatives are primarily reflected within the “other” component of OI&E. See Note 7  for further details. Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
68.  The gross notional amounts of outstanding derivative instruments were as follows (in millions):
As of December 31,
2022 2023
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments:
Foreign exchange contracts
Cash flow hedges  $ 15,972 $ 18,039 
Fair value hedges $ 2,117 $ 2,065 
Net investment hedges $ 8,751 $ 9,472 
Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments:
Foreign exchange contracts $ 34,979 $ 39,722 
Other contracts $ 7,932 $ 10,818 
The fair values of outstanding derivative instruments were as follows (in millions):
 As of December 31, 2022 As of December 31, 2023
 Assets(1)Liabilities(2)Assets(1)Liabilities(2)
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments:
     Foreign exchange contracts $ 271 $ 556 $ 205 $ 242 
Derivatives not designated as hedging 
instruments:
     Foreign exchange contracts  365  207  134  156 
     Other contracts  40  47  114  47 
Total derivatives not designated as hedging 
instruments  405  254  248  203 
Total $ 676 $ 810 $ 453 $ 445 
(1) Derivative assets are recorded as other current and non-current assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(2) Derivative liabilities are recorded as accrued expenses and other liabilities, current and non-current in the Consolidated 
Balance Sheets.
The gains (losses)  on derivatives in cash flow hedging and net investment hedging relationships recognized in 
other comprehensive income (OCI) are summarized below (in millions):
 Year Ended December 31,
2021 2022 2023
Derivatives in cash flow hedging relationship:
Foreign exchange contracts
Amount included in the assessment of effectiveness $ 806 $ 1,699 $ 90 
Amount excluded from the assessment of 
effectiveness  48  (188)  84 
Derivatives in net investment hedging relationship:
Foreign exchange contracts
Amount included in the assessment of effectiveness  754  608  (287) 
Total $ 1,608 $ 2,119 $ (113) Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
69.  The table below presents the gains (losses) of our derivatives on the Consolidated Statements of Income: (in 
millions):
Year Ended December 31,
2021 2022 2023
RevenuesOther 
income 
(expense), 
net RevenuesOther 
income 
(expense), 
net RevenuesOther 
income 
(expense), 
net
Total amounts in the Consolidated Statements of 
Income $ 257,637 $ 12,020 $ 282,836 $ (3,514) $ 307,394 $ 1,424 
Effect of cash flow hedges:
Foreign exchange contracts
Amount reclassified from AOCI to income $ 165 $ 0 $ 2,046 $ 0 $ 213 $ 0 
Amount excluded from the assessment of 
effectiveness (amortized)  (16)  0  (85)  0  24  0 
Effect of fair value hedges:
Foreign exchange contracts
Hedged items  0  (95)  0  (162)  0  59 
Derivatives designated as hedging 
instruments  0  95  0  163  0  (59) 
Amount excluded from the assessment of 
effectiveness  0  8  0  16  0  15 
Effect of net investment hedges:
Foreign exchange contracts
Amount excluded from the assessment of 
effectiveness  0  82  0  171  0  187 
Effect of non designated hedges:
Foreign exchange contracts  0  (860) 0 (395)  0  7 
Other contracts  0  101  0  144  0  53 
Total gains (losses) $ 149 $ (669) $ 1,961 $ (63) $ 237 $ 262 
Offsetting of Derivatives
We enter into master netting arrangements and collateral security arrangements to reduce credit risk. Cash 
collateral received related to derivative instruments under our collateral security arrangements are included in other 
current assets  with a corresponding liability . Cash and non-cash collateral pledged related to derivative instruments 
under our collateral security arrangements are included in other current assets .Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
70.  The gross amounts of derivative instruments subject to master netting arrangements with various 
counterparties, and cash and non-cash collateral received and pledged under such agreements were as follows (in 
millions):
As of December 31, 2022
Gross Amounts Not Offset in 
the Consolidated Balance 
Sheets, but Have Legal Rights 
to Offset
Gross 
Amounts 
RecognizedGross 
Amounts 
Offset in the 
Consolidated 
Balance 
SheetsNet Amounts  
Presented in 
the 
Consolidated 
Balance 
SheetsFinancial 
Instruments(1)Cash and 
Non-Cash 
Collateral 
Received or 
Pledged Net Amounts
Derivatives assets $ 760 $ (84) $ 676 $ (463) $ (132) $ 81 
Derivatives liabilities $ 894 $ (84) $ 810 $ (463) $ (28) $ 319 
As of December 31, 2023
Gross Amounts Not Offset in 
the Consolidated Balance 
Sheets, but Have Legal Rights 
to Offset
Gross 
Amounts
RecognizedGross 
Amounts 
Offset in the 
Consolidated 
Balance 
SheetsNet Amounts 
Presented in 
the 
Consolidated 
Balance 
SheetsFinancial 
Instruments(1)Cash and 
Non-Cash 
Collateral 
Received or 
Pledged Net Amounts
Derivatives assets $ 535 $ (82) $ 453 $ (213) $ (75) $ 165 
Derivatives liabilities $ 527 $ (82) $ 445 $ (213) $ (16) $ 216 
(1) The balances as of December 31, 2022 and 2023 were related to derivatives allowed to be net settled in accordance with our 
master netting agreements.
Note 4.        Leases  
We have entered into operating lease agreements primarily for data centers, land, and offices throughout the 
world with lease periods expiring between 2024  and 2063 . 
Components of operating lease expense were as follows (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
2021 2022 2023
Operating lease cost $ 2,699 $ 2,900 $ 3,362 
Variable lease cost  726  838  1,182 
Total operating lease cost $ 3,425 $ 3,738 $ 4,544 
Supplemental information related to operating leases was as follows (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
2021 2022 2023
Cash payments for operating leases $ 2,489 $ 2,722 $ 3,173 
New operating lease assets obtained in exchange for 
operating lease liabilities $ 2,951 $ 4,383 $ 2,877 Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
71.  As of December 31, 2023 , our operating leases had a weighted average remaining lease term of 8.1 years  and a 
weighted average discount rate of 3.1% . Future lease payments under operating leases as of December 31, 2023  
were as follows (in millions):
2024 $ 3,179 
2025  2,929 
2026  2,450 
2027  1,951 
2028  1,488 
Thereafter  5,685 
Total future lease payments  17,682 
Less imputed interest  (2,431) 
Total lease liability balance $ 15,251 
As of December 31, 2023 , we have entered into leases that have not yet commenced with short-term and long-
term future lease payments of $657 million  and $3.3 billion  that are not yet recorded on our Consolidated Balance 
Sheets. These leases will commence between 2024  and 2026  with non-cancelable lease terms betwee n one and 25 
years.
Note 5.        Variable Interest Entities 
Consolidated Variable Interest Entities
We consolidate VIEs in which we hold a variable interest and are the primary beneficiary. The results of 
operations and financial position of these VIEs are included in our consolidated financial statements.  
 For certain consolidated VIEs, their assets are not available to us and their creditors do not have recourse to us. 
As of December 31, 2022  and 2023 , assets that can only be used to settle obligations of these VIEs were $4.1 billion  
and $4.9 billion , respectively, and the liabilities for which creditors only have recourse to the VIEs were $2.6 billion  and 
$2.5 billion , respectively.  We may continue to fund ongoing operations of certain VIEs that are included within Other 
Bets.  
Total noncontrolling interests (NCI) in our consolidated subsidiaries were $3.8 billion  and $3.4 billion  as of 
December 31, 2022  and 2023 , respectively, of which $1.1 billion  is redeemable noncontrolling interest (RNCI) for both 
periods. NCI and RNCI are included within additional paid-in capital. Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests 
was not material for an y period presented and is included within the "other" component of OI&E. See Note 7  for further 
details on OI&E.
Unconsolidated Variable Interest Entities
We have investments in VIEs in which we are not the primary beneficiary. These VIEs include private companies 
that are primarily early stage companies and certain renewable energy entities in which activities involve power 
generation using renewable sources.
We have determined that the governance structures of these entities do not allow us to direct the activities that 
would significantly affect their economic performance. Therefore, we are not the primary beneficiary, and the results of 
operations and financial position of these VIEs are not included in our consolidated financial statements. We account 
for these investments primarily as non-marketable equity securities or equity method investments.
The maximum exposure of these unconsolidated VIEs is generally based on the current carrying value of the 
investments and any future funding commitments. The m aximum exposure  and carrying value of these unconsolidated 
VIEs were $2.8 billion  and $2.7 billion , respectively, as of December 31, 2022  and $5.7 billion  and $4.0 billion , 
respectively, as of December 31, 2023 . The difference between the maximum exposure and the carrying value relates 
primarily to future funding commitments.
Note 6.       Debt  
Short-Term Debt
We have a debt financing program of up to $10.0 billion  through the issuance of commercial paper. Net proceeds 
from this program are used for general corporate purposes. We had no commercial paper outstanding as of 
December 31, 2022  and 2023 . 
Our short-term debt balance also includes the current portion of certain long-term debt.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
72.  Long-Term Debt
Total outstanding debt is summarized below (in millions, except percentages):
Effective 
Interest RateAs of December 31,
Maturity Coupon Rate 2022 2023
Debt
2014-2020 Notes issuances 2024 - 2060 0.45%  - 3.38% 0.57%  - 3.38% $ 13,000 $ 13,000 
Future finance lease payments, net and 
other (1) 2,142  1,746 
      Total debt  15,142  14,746 
Unamortized discount and debt 
issuance costs  (143)  (130) 
Less: Current portion of long-term 
notes(2) 0  (1,000) 
Less: Current portion of future finance 
lease payments, net and other current 
debt(1)(2) (298)  (363) 
       Total long-term debt $ 14,701 $ 13,253 
(1)Future finance lease payments are net of imputed interest.
(2)Total current portion of long-term debt is included within other accrued expenses and current liabilities. See Note 7 for further 
details.
The notes in the table above are fixed-rate senior unsecured obligations and generally rank equally with each 
other. We may redeem the notes at any time in whole or in part at specified redemption prices. The effective interest 
rates are based on proceeds received with interest payable semi-annually.
The total estimated fair value of the outstanding notes was approximately $9.9 billion  and $10.3 billion  as of 
December 31, 2022  and December 31, 2023 , respectively. The fair value was determined based on observable market 
prices of identical instruments in less active markets and is categorized accordingly as Level 2 in the fair value 
hierarchy.
As of December 31, 2023 , the aggregate future principal payments for long-term debt, including finance lease 
liabilities, for each of the next five years and thereafter were as follows (in millions):
2024 $ 1,299 
2025 1,163
2026 2,165
2027 1,143
2028 132
Thereafter 8,960
Total $ 14,862 
Credit Facility
As of December 31, 2023 , we had $10.0 billion  of revolving credit facilities, of which $4.0 billion  expires in April 
2024  and $6.0 billion  expires in April 2028 . The interest rates for all credit facilities are determined based on a formula 
using certain market rates, as well as our progress toward the achievement of certain sustainability goals.  No amounts 
were outstanding under the credit facilities as of December 31, 2022  and 2023 .
Note 7.        Supplemental Financial Statement Information  
Accounts Receivable
The allowance for credit losses on accounts receivable was $754 million  and $771 million  as of December 31, 
2022  and 2023 , respectively.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
73.  Property and Equipment, Net
Property and equipment, net, consisted of the following (in millions):
As of December 31,
2022 2023
Land and buildings $ 66,897 $ 74,083 
Information technology assets  66,267  80,594 
Construction in progress  27,657  35,229 
Leasehold improvements  10,575  11,425 
Furniture and fixtures  314  472 
Property and equipment, gross  171,710  201,803 
Less: accumulated depreciation  (59,042)  (67,458) 
Property and equipment, net $ 112,668 $ 134,345 
Our technical infrastructure is comprised of information technology assets, including servers and networking 
equipment , and data center land and buildings.
Accrued Expenses and Other Current Liabilities
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities consisted of the following (in millions):
As of December 31,
2022 2023
European Commission fines(1)$ 9,106 $ 9,525 
Accrued purchases of property and equipment  3,019  4,679 
Accrued customer liabilities  3,619  4,140 
Current operating lease liabilities  2,477  2,791 
Income taxes payable, net  1,632  2,748 
Other accrued expenses and current liabilities  18,013  22,285 
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities $ 37,866 $ 46,168 
(1) While each EC decision is under appeal, the fines are included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities on our 
Consolidated Balance Sheets, as we provided bank guarantees (in lieu of a cash payment) for the fines. Amounts include the 
effects of foreign exchange and interest. Se e Note 10  for further details .Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
74.  Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
Components of AOCI, net of income tax, were as follows (in millions):
Foreign Currency 
Translation 
AdjustmentsUnrealized Gains 
(Losses) on 
Available-for-Sale 
InvestmentsUnrealized 
Gains (Losses) 
on Cash Flow 
Hedges Total
Balance as of December 31, 2020 $ (864) $ 1,612 $ (115) $ 633 
Other comprehensive income (loss) before 
reclassifications  (1,442)  (1,312)  668  (2,086) 
Amounts excluded from the assessment of 
hedge effectiveness recorded in AOCI  0  0  48  48 
Amounts reclassified from AOCI  0  (64)  (154)  (218) 
Other comprehensive income (loss)  (1,442)  (1,376)  562  (2,256) 
Balance as of December 31, 2021  (2,306)  236  447  (1,623) 
Other comprehensive income (loss) before 
reclassifications  (1,836)  (4,720)  1,463  (5,093) 
Amounts excluded from the assessment of 
hedge effectiveness recorded in AOCI  0  0  (188)  (188) 
Amounts reclassified from AOCI  0  1,007  (1,706)  (699) 
Other comprehensive income (loss)  (1,836)  (3,713)  (431)  (5,980) 
Balance as of December 31, 2022  (4,142)  (3,477)  16  (7,603) 
Other comprehensive income (loss) before 
reclassifications  735  1,344  84  2,163 
Amounts excluded from the assessment of 
hedge effectiveness recorded in AOCI  0  0  84  84 
Amounts reclassified from AOCI  0  1,168  (214)  954 
Other comprehensive income (loss)  735  2,512  (46)  3,201 
Balance as of December 31, 2023 $ (3,407) $ (965) $ (30) $ (4,402) 
The effects on net income of amounts reclassified from AOCI were as follows (in millions):
Gains (Losses) Reclassified from AOCI to the 
Consolidated Statements of Income
Year Ended December 31,
 AOCI Components Location 2021 2022 2023
Unrealized gains (losses) on available-for-sale investments
Other income (expense), net $ 82 $ (1,291) $ (1,497) 
Benefit (provision) for income 
taxes  (18)  284  329 
Net of income tax  64  (1,007)  (1,168) 
Unrealized gains (losses) on cash flow hedges
Foreign exchange contracts Revenue  165  2,046  213 
Interest rate contracts Other income (expense), net  6  6  6 
Benefit (provision) for income 
taxes  (17)  (346)  (5) 
Net of income tax  154  1,706  214 
Total amount reclassified, net of income tax $ 218 $ 699 $ (954) Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
75.  Other Income (Expense), Net 
Components of OI&E  were as follows (in millions): 
 Year Ended December 31,
 2021 2022 2023
Interest income $ 1,499 $ 2,174 $ 3,865 
Interest expense(1) (346)  (357)  (308) 
Foreign currency exchange gain (loss), net  (240)  (654)  (1,238) 
Gain (loss) on debt securities, net  (110)  (2,064)  (1,215) 
Gain (loss) on equity securities, net  12,380  (3,455)  392 
Performance fees  (1,908)  798  257 
Income (loss) and impairment from equity method investments, net  334  (337)  (628) 
Other  411  381  299 
Other income (expense), net $ 12,020 $ (3,514) $ 1,424 
(1) Interest expense is net of interest capitalized of $163 million , $128 million , and $181 million  for the years ended December 31, 
2021 , 2022 , and 2023 , respectively.
Note 8.        Workforce Reduction and Other Initiatives  
We have a company-wide effort underway to re-engineer our cost base. As part of this program, in January 2023, 
we announced a reduction of our workforce. As a result, total employee severance and related charges recorded 
during the year ended December 31, 2023 wer e $2.1 billion . Substantially all of the employees affected were no longer 
included in our headcount as of December 31, 2023.
In addition, we are taking actions to optimize our global office space.  As a result, exit charges recorded during the 
year ended December 31, 2023 , were $1.8 billion  as reflected in the table below. In addition to these exit charges, for 
the year ended December 31, 2023 , we incurred $269 million  in accelerated rent and accelerated depreciation, which 
are not included in the table below.
Severance and office space exit charges are included within our consolidated statements of income as follows (in 
millions):
Year Ended December 31, 2023
Severance 
and Related (1)Office Space Total
Cost of revenues $ 479 $ 481 $ 960 
Research and development 848  870  1,718 
Sales and marketing 497  257  754 
General and administrative 264  237  501 
Total charges $ 2,088 $ 1,845 $ 3,933 
(1)Severance includes amounts to be settled in cash, accounted for as one-time involuntary employee termination benefits, and 
SBC.
For segment reporting, the substantial majority  of these charges are included within Alphabet-level activities in our 
segment results.
For the  year ended December 31, 2023 , changes in liabilities resulting from the severance charges and related 
accruals were as follows (in millions):
Severance and 
Related
Balance as of December 31, 2022 $ 0 
Charges(1) 1,656 
Cash payments  (1,579) 
Balance as of December 31, 2023(2)$ 77 
(1)Excludes non-cash SBC of $432 million .
(2)Included in accrued compensation and benefits on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
76.  Note 9.        Goodwill
Changes in the carrying amount of goodwill for the years ended December 31, 2022  and 2023  were as follows 
(in millions):
Google 
Services Google Cloud Other Bets Total
Balance as of December 31, 2021 $ 19,826 $ 2,337 $ 793 $ 22,956 
Acquisitions  1,176  4,876  119  6,171 
Foreign currency translation and other adjustments  (155)  (8)  (4)  (167) 
Balance as of December 31, 2022  20,847  7,205  908  28,960 
Acquisitions  240  3  0  243 
Foreign currency translation and other adjustments  31  (9)  (27)  (5) 
Balance as of December 31, 2023 $ 21,118 $ 7,199 $ 881 $ 29,198 
Note 10.        Commitments and Contingencies  
Commitments
We have content licensing agreements with future fixed or minimum guaranteed commitments of $10.6 billion  as 
of December 31, 2023 , of which the majority is paid over  seven years  ending in the first quarter of 2030.
Indemnifications
In the normal course of business, including to facilitate transactions in our services and products and corporate 
activities, we indemnify certain parties, including advertisers, Google Network partners, distribution partners, 
customers of Google Cloud offerings, lessors,  and service providers with respect to certain matters. We have agreed 
to defend and/or hold certain parties harmless against losses arising from a breach of representations or covenants, or 
out of intellectual property infringement or other claims made against certain parties. Several of these agreements limit 
the time within which an indemnification claim can be made and the amount of the claim. In addition, we have entered 
into indemnification agreements with our officers and directors, and our bylaws contain similar indemnification 
obligations to our agents.
It is not possible to make a reasonable estimate of the maximum potential amount under these indemnification 
agreements due to the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement. Additionally, the 
payments we have made under such agreements have not had a material adverse effect on our results of operations, 
cash flows, or financial position. However, to the extent that valid indemnification claims arise in the future, future 
payments by us could be significant and could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations or cash flows 
in a particular period. 
As of December 31, 2023 , we did not have any material indemnification claims that were probable or reasonably 
possible.
Legal Matters
We record a liability when we believe that it is probable that a loss has been incurred, and the amount can be 
reasonably estimated. If we determine that a loss is reasonably possible and the loss or range of loss can be 
estimated, we disclose the reasonably possible loss. We evaluate developments in our legal matters that could affect 
the amount of liability that has been previously accrued, and the matters and related reasonably possible losses 
disclosed, and make adjustments as appropriate.
Certain outstanding matters seek speculative, substantial or indeterminate monetary amounts, substantial 
changes to our business practices and products, or structural remedies. Significant judgment is required to determine 
both the likelihood of there being a loss and the estimated amount of a loss related to such matters, and we may be 
unable to estimate the reasonably possible loss or range of losses. The outcomes of outstanding legal matters are 
inherently unpredictable and subject to significant uncertainties, and could, either individually or in aggregate, have a 
material adverse effect.
We expense legal fees in the period in which they are incurred.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
77.  Antitrust Investigations
On November 30, 2010, the EC's Directorate General for Competition opened an investigation into various 
antitrust-related complaints against us.
On June 27, 2017, the EC announced its decision that certain actions taken by Google regarding its display and 
ranking of shopping search results and ads infringed European competition law. The EC decision imposed a €2.4 
billion  ($2.7 billion  as of June 27, 2017 ) fine. On September 11, 2017, we appealed the EC decision to the General 
Court, and on September 27, 2017, we implemented product changes to bring shopping ads into compliance with the 
EC's decision. We recognized a charge of $2.7 billion  for the fine in the second quarter of 2017. On November 10, 
2021, the General Court rejected our appeal, and we subsequently filed an appeal with the European Court of Justice 
on January 20, 2022.
On July 18, 2018, the EC announced its decision that certain provisions in Google’s Android-related distribution 
agreements infringed European competition law. The EC decision imposed a €4.3 billion  ($5.1 billion  as of June 30, 
2018 ) fine and directed the termination of the conduct at issue. On October 9, 2018, we appealed the EC decision, and 
on October 29, 2018, we implemented changes to certain of our Android distribution practices. On September 14, 
2022, the General Court reduced the fine from €4.3 billion  to €4.1 billion . We subsequently filed an appeal with the 
European Court of Justice. In 2018, we recognized a charge of $5.1 billion  for the fine, which we reduced by 
$217 million  in 2022.
On March 20, 2019, the EC announced its decision that certain contractual provisions in agreements that Google 
had with AdSense for Search partners infringed European competition law. The EC decision imposed a fine of €1.5 
billion  ($1.7 billion  as of March 20, 2019 ) and directed actions related to AdSense for Search partners' agreements, 
which we implemented prior to the decision. On June 4, 2019, we appealed the EC decision. We recognized a charge 
of $1.7 billion  for the fine in the first quarter of 2019.
From time to time we are subject to formal and informal inquiries and investigations on various competition 
matters by regulatory authorities in the U.S., Europe, and other jurisdictions globally. Examples, for which given their 
nature we cannot estimate a possible loss, include:
•In August 2019, we began receiving civil investigative demands from the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) 
requesting information and documents relating to our prior antitrust investigations and certain aspects of our 
business. The DOJ and a number of state Attorneys General filed a lawsuit in the U.S. District Court for the 
District of Columbia on October 20, 2020 alleging that Google violated U.S. antitrust laws relating to Search 
and Search advertising. The trial ended on November 16, 2023, and we expect a decision in 2024. Further, in 
June 2022, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) and the United Kingdom's 
Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) each opened an investigation into Search distribution practices.
•On December 16, 2020, a number of state Attorneys General filed an antitrust complaint in the U.S. District 
Court for the Eastern District of Texas, alleging that Google violated U.S. antitrust laws as well as state 
deceptive trade laws relating to its advertising technology , and a trial is scheduled for March 2025.  Additionally, 
on January 24, 2023, the DOJ, along with a number of state Attorneys General, filed an antitrust complaint in 
the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia alleging that Google’s digital advertising technology 
products violate U.S. antitrust laws, and on April 17, 2023, a number of additional state Attorneys General 
joined the complaint. The EC, the CMA, and the ACCC each opened a formal investigation into Google's 
advertising technology business practices on June 22, 2021, May 25, 2022, and June 29, 2022, respectively. 
On June 14, 2023, the EC issued a Statement of Objections (SO) informing Google of its preliminary view that 
Google violated European antitrust laws relating to its advertising technology. We responded to the SO on 
December 1, 2023.
•On July 7, 2021, a number of state Attorneys General filed an antitrust complaint in the U.S. District Court for 
the Northern District of California, alleging that Google’s operation of Android and Google Pla y violated U.S. 
antitrust laws and state antitrust and consumer protection laws. In September 2023, we reached a settlement 
in principle with 50 state Attorneys General and three territories. The U.S. District Court subsequently vacated 
the trial date with the states, and any final approval of the settlement is expected to occur in 2024. In May 
2022, the EC and the CMA each opened investigations into Google Play’s business practices. Korean 
regulators are investigating Google Play's billing practices, including a formal review in May 2022 of Google's 
compliance with the new app store billing regulations. 
We believe we have strong arguments against these claims and will defend ourselves vigorously . We continue to 
cooperate with federal and state regulators in the U.S., the EC, and other regulators around the world.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
78.  Privacy Matters 
We are subject to a number of privacy-related laws and regulations, and we currently are party to  a number of 
privacy investigations and lawsuits ongoing in multiple jurisdictions. For example, there are ongoing investigations and 
litigation in the U.S. and the EU, including those relating to our collection and use of location information and 
advertising practices, which could result in significant fines, judgments, and product changes. 
Patent and Intellectual Property Claims
We have had patent, copyright, trade secret, and trademark infringement  lawsuits filed against us claiming that 
certain of our products, services, and technologies infringe others' intellectual property rights. Adverse results in these 
lawsuits may include awards of substantial monetary damages, costly royalty or licensing agreements, or orders 
preventing us from offering certain features, functionalities, products, or services. As a result, we may have to change 
our business practices and develop non-infringing products or technologies, which could result in a loss of revenues for 
us and otherwise harm our business. In addition, the U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC) has increasingly 
become an important forum to litigate intellectual property disputes because an ultimate loss in an ITC action can 
result in a prohibition on importing infringing products into the U.S. Because the U.S. is an important market, a 
prohibition on importation could have an adverse effect on us, including preventing us from importing many important 
products into the U.S. or necessitating workarounds that may limit certain features of our products.
Furthermore, many of our agreements with our customers and partners require us to indemnify them against 
certain intellectual property infringement claims, which would increase our costs as a result of defending such claims, 
and may require that we pay significant damages if there were an adverse ruling in any such claims. In addition, our 
customers and partners may discontinue the use of our products, services, and technologies, as a result of injunctions 
or otherwise, which could result in loss of revenues and adversely affect our business.
Other
We are subject to claims, lawsuits, regulatory and government investigations, other proceedings, and consent 
orders involving competition, intellectual property, data security, tax and related compliance, labor and employment, 
commercial disputes, content generated by our users, goods and services offered by advertisers or publishers using 
our platforms, personal injury, consumer protection, and other matters.  For example, in December 2023, a California 
jury delivered a verdict in  Epic Games v. Google  finding that Google violated antitrust laws related to Google Play's 
business. The pr esiding judge will determine remedies in 2024, and the range of potential remedies vary widely. We 
plan to appeal.  We also periodically have data incidents that we report to relevant regulators as required by law.  
These  claims , consent orders, lawsuits, regulatory and government investigations, and other proceedings could 
result in substantial fines and penalties, injunctive relief, ongoing monitoring and auditing obligations, changes to our 
products and services, alterations to our business models and operations, and collateral related civil litigation or other 
adverse consequences,  all of which could harm our business, reputation, financial condition, and operating results.
We have ongoing legal matters relating to Russia. For example, civil judgments that include compounding 
penalties have been imposed upon us in connection with disputes regarding the termination of accounts, including 
those of sanctioned parties. We do not believe these ongoing legal matters will have a material adverse effect .
Non-Income Taxes
We are under audit by various domestic and foreign tax authorities with regards to non-income tax matters. The 
subject matter of non-income tax audits primarily arises from disputes on the tax treatment and tax rate applied to the 
sale of our products and services in these jurisdictions and the tax treatment of certain employee benefits. We accrue 
non-income taxes that may result from examinations by, or any negotiated agreements with, these tax authorities when 
a loss is probable and reasonably estimable. If we determine that a loss is reasonably possible and the loss or range of 
loss can be estimated, we disclose the reasonably possible loss. Due to the inherent complexity and uncertainty of 
these matters and judicial process in certain jurisdictions, the final outcome may be materially different from our 
expectations.
See, Note 14  for information regarding income tax contingencies.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
79.  Note 11.        Stockholders' Equity  
Class A and Class B Common Stock and Class C Capital Stock
Our Board of Directors has authorized three  classes of stock, Class A and Class B common stock, and Class C 
capital stock. The rights of the holders of each class of our common and capital stock are identical, except with respect 
to voting. Each share of Class A common stock is entitled to one vote per share. Each share of Class B common stock 
is entitled to 10 votes per share. Class C capital stock has no voting rights, except as required by applicable law. 
Shares of Class B common stock may be converted at any time at the option of the stockholder and automatically 
convert upon sale or transfer to Class A common stock.
Share Repurchases
In the years ended December 31, 2021 , 2022 , and 2023 , we repurchased  $50.3 billion , $59.3 billion , and 
$62.2 billion , respectively, of Alphabet's Class A and Class C shares.
In April 2023, the Board of Directors of Alphabet authorized the company to repurchase up to an additional 
$70.0 billion  of its Class A and Class C shares. As of December 31, 2023 , $36.3 billion  remains available for Class A 
and Class C share repurchases. 
The following table presents Class A and Class C shares repurchased and subsequently retired (in millions):
Year Ended December 31, 2022 Year Ended December 31, 2023
Shares Amount Shares Amount
Class A share repurchases 61$ 6,719 78$ 9,316 
Class C share repurchases 469  52,577 450  52,868 
Total share repurchases(1)530 $ 59,296 528 $ 62,184 
(1)         Shares repurchased include unsettled repurchases as of December 31, 2023 .
Class A and Class C shares are repurchased in a manner deemed in the best interest of the company and its 
stockholders, taking into account the economic cost and prevailing market conditions, including the relative trading 
prices and volumes of the Class A and Class C shares. Repurchases are executed from time to time, subject to 
general business and market conditions and other investment opportunities, through open market purchases or 
privately negotiated transactions, including through Rule 10b5-1 plans. The repurchase program does not have an 
expiration date.
Note 12.        Net Income Per Share  
We compute net income per share of Class A, Class B, and Class C stock using the two-class method. Basic net 
income per share is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during the period. Diluted net 
income per share is computed using the weighted-average number of shares and the effect of potentially dilutive 
securities outstanding during the period. Potentially dilutive securities consist of RSUs and other contingently issuable 
shares. The dilutive effect of outstanding RSUs and other contingently issuable shares is reflected in diluted earnings 
per share by application of the treasury stock method. The computation of the diluted net income per share of Class A 
stock assumes the conversion of Class B stock, while the diluted net income per share of Class B stock does not 
assume the conversion of those shares.
The rights, including the liquidation and dividend rights, of the holders of our Class A, Class B, and Class C stock 
are identical, except with respect to voting. Furthermore, there are a number of safeguards built into our certificate of 
incorporation, as well as Delaware law, which preclude our Board of Directors from declaring or paying unequal per 
share dividends on our Class A, Class B, and Class C stock. Specifically, Delaware law provides that amendments to 
our certificate of incorporation which would have the effect of adversely altering the rights, powers, or preferences of a 
given class of stock must be approved by the class of stock adversely affected by the proposed amendment. In 
addition, our certificate of incorporation provides that before any such amendment may be put to a stockholder vote, it 
must be approved by the unanimous consent of our Board of Directors. As a result, the undistributed earnings for each 
year are allocated based on the contractual participation rights of the Class A, Class B, and Class C stock as if the 
earnings for the year had been distributed. As the liquidation and dividend rights are identical, the undistributed 
earnings are allocated on a proportionate basis. 
In the years ended December 31, 2021 , 2022 , and 2023 , the net income per share amounts are the same for 
Class A, Class B, and Class C stock because the holders of each class are entitled to equal per share dividends or 
distributions in liquidation in accordance with the Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of Alphabet Inc.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
80.  The following table  sets forth the computation of basic and diluted net income per share of Class A, Class B, and 
Class C stock (in millions, except per share amounts):
 Year Ended December 31,
 2021
 Class A Class B Class C
Basic net income per share:
Numerator
Allocation of undistributed earnings $ 34,200 $ 5,174 $ 36,659 
Denominator
Number of shares used in per share computation  6,006  909  6,438 
Basic net income per share $ 5.69 $ 5.69 $ 5.69 
Diluted net income per share:
Numerator
Allocation of undistributed earnings for basic computation $ 34,200 $ 5,174 $ 36,659 
Reallocation of undistributed earnings as a result of conversion of Class B to Class A 
shares  5,174  0  0 
Reallocation of undistributed earnings  (581)  (77)  581 
Allocation of undistributed earnings $ 38,793 $ 5,097 $ 37,240 
Denominator
Number of shares used in basic computation  6,006  909  6,438 
Weighted-average effect of dilutive securities
Add:
Conversion of Class B to Class A shares outstanding  909  0  0 
Restricted stock units and other contingently issuable shares  0  0  200 
Number of shares used in per share computation  6,915  909  6,638 
Diluted net income per share $ 5.61 $ 5.61 $ 5.61 
 Year Ended December 31,
 2022
 Class A Class B Class C
Basic net income per share:
Numerator
Allocation of undistributed earnings $ 27,518 $ 4,072 $ 28,382 
Denominator
Number of shares used in per share computation  5,994  887  6,182 
Basic net income per share $ 4.59 $ 4.59 $ 4.59 
Diluted net income per share:
Numerator
Allocation of undistributed earnings for basic computation $ 27,518 $ 4,072 $ 28,382 
Reallocation of undistributed earnings as a result of conversion of Class B to Class A 
shares  4,072  0  0 
Reallocation of undistributed earnings  (230)  (30)  230 
Allocation of undistributed earnings $ 31,360 $ 4,042 $ 28,612 
Denominator
Number of shares used in basic computation  5,994  887  6,182 
Weighted-average effect of dilutive securities
Add:
Conversion of Class B to Class A shares outstanding  887  0  0 
Restricted stock units and other contingently issuable shares  0  0  96 
Number of shares used in per share computation  6,881  887  6,278 
Diluted net income per share $ 4.56 $ 4.56 $ 4.56 Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
81.   Year Ended December 31,
 2023
 Class A Class B Class C
Basic net income per share:
Numerator
Allocation of undistributed earnings $ 34,601 $ 5,124 $ 34,070 
Denominator
Number of shares used in per share computation  5,922  877  5,831 
Basic net income per share $ 5.84 $ 5.84 $ 5.84 
Diluted net income per share:
Numerator
Allocation of undistributed earnings for basic computation $ 34,601 $ 5,124 $ 34,070 
Reallocation of undistributed earnings as a result of conversion of Class B to Class A 
shares  5,124  0  0 
Reallocation of undistributed earnings  (287)  (37)  287 
Allocation of undistributed earnings $ 39,438 $ 5,087 $ 34,357 
Denominator
Number of shares used in basic computation  5,922  877  5,831 
Weighted-average effect of dilutive securities
Add:
Conversion of Class B to Class A shares outstanding  877  0  0 
Restricted stock units and other contingently issuable shares  0  0  92 
Number of shares used in per share computation  6,799  877  5,923 
Diluted net income per share $ 5.80 $ 5.80 $ 5.80 
Note 13.        Compensation Plans  
Stock Plans
Our stock plans include the Alphabet Amended and Restated 2021 Stock Plan ("Alphabet 2021 Stock Plan") and 
Other Bet s stock-based plans. Under our stock plans, RSUs and other types of awards may be granted. Under the 
Alphabet 2021 Stock Plan, an RSU award is an agreement to issue shares of our Class C stock at the time the award 
vests. RSUs generally vest over four years  contingent upon employment on the vesting date.
As of December 31, 2023 , there were 723 million  shares of Class C stock reserved for future issuance under the 
Alphabet 2021 Stock Plan.
Stock-Based Compensation
For the years ended December 31, 2021 , 2022 , and 2023 , total SBC expense was $15.7 billion , $19.5 billion , and 
$22.1 billion , including amounts associated with awards we expect to settle in Alphabet stock of $15.0 billion , $18.8 
billion , and $21.7 billion , respectively.
During the year ended December 31, 2023 , total SBC expense includes $432 million  associated with workforce 
reduction costs. See Note 8  for further details.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 , 2022 , and 2023 , we recognized tax benefits on total SBC expense, 
which are reflected in the provision for income taxes in the Consolidated Statements of Income, of $3.1 billion , $3.9 
billion , and $4.5 billion , respectively.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 , 2022 , and 2023 , tax benefit realized related to awards vested or 
exercised during the period was $5.9 billion , $4.7 billion , and $5.6 billion , respectively. These amounts do not include 
the indirect effects of stock-based awards, which primarily relate to the R&D tax credit.
Stock-Based Award ActivitiesTable of Contents Alphabet Inc.
82.  The following table summarizes the activities for  unvested Alphabet RSUs  for the year ended December 31, 2023  
(in millions, except per share amounts):
Unvested Restricted Stock Units
     Number of    
SharesWeighted-
Average
Grant-Date
Fair Value
Unvested as of December 31, 2022  324 $ 107.98 
Granted  263 $ 97.59 
Vested  (217) $ 100.36 
Forfeited/canceled  (32) $ 106.56 
Unvested as of December 31, 2023  338 $ 104.93 
The weighted-average grant-date fair value of RSUs granted during the years ended December 31,  2021  and 
2022  was $97.46  and $127.22 , respectively. Total fair value of RSUs, as of their respective vesting dates, during the 
years ended December 31, 2021 , 2022 , and 2023 , were $28.8 billion , $23.9 billion , and $26.6 billion , respectively.
As of December 31, 2023 , there was $33.5 billion  of unrecognized compensation cost related to unvested RSUs. 
This amount is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.5 years . 
Note 14.        Income Taxes  
Income from continuing operations before income taxes consisted of the following (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
 2021 2022 2023
Domestic operations $ 77,016 $ 61,307 $ 73,600 
Foreign operations  13,718  10,021  12,117 
Total $ 90,734 $ 71,328 $ 85,717 
Provision for income taxes consisted of the following (in millions):
Year Ended December 31,
 2021 2022 2023
Current:
Federal and state $ 10,126 $ 17,120 $ 17,125 
Foreign  2,692  2,434  2,526 
Total  12,818  19,554  19,651 
Deferred:
Federal and state  2,018  (8,052)  (7,482) 
Foreign  (135)  (146)  (247) 
Total  1,883  (8,198)  (7,729) 
Provision for income taxes $ 14,701 $ 11,356 $ 11,922 Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
83.  The reconciliation of federal statutory income tax rate to our effective income tax rate was as follows:
Year Ended December 31,
 2021 2022 2023
U.S. federal statutory tax rate  21.0 %  21.0 %  21.0 %
Foreign income taxed at different rates  0.2  3.0  0.3 
Foreign-derived intangible income deduction  (2.5)  (5.4)  (4.6) 
Stock-based compensation expense  (2.5)  (1.2)  (0.8) 
Federal research credit  (1.6)  (2.2)  (1.8) 
Deferred tax asset valuation allowance  0.6  0.9  0.6 
State and local income taxes  1.0  0.8  1.0 
Effect of tax law change  0.0  0.0  (1.4) 
Other  0.0  (1.0)  (0.4) 
Effective tax rate  16.2 %  15.9 %  13.9 %
In 2022, there was an increase in the U.S. Foreign Derived Intangible Income tax deduction from the effects of 
capitalization and amortization of R&D expenses starting in 2022 as required by the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
In 2023, the  IRS issued a rule change allowing taxpayers to temporarily apply the regulations in effect prior to 
2022 related to U.S. federal foreign tax credits as well as a separate rule change with interim guidance on the 
capitalization and amortization of R&D expenses. A cumulative one-time adjustment applicable to the prior period for 
these tax rule changes was recorded in 2023.
Deferred Income Taxes
Deferred income taxes reflect the net effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets 
and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. Significant components 
of our deferred tax assets and liabilities were as follows (in millions):
As of December 31,
2022 2023
Deferred tax assets:
Accrued employee benefits $ 955 $ 1,855 
Accruals and reserves not currently deductible  1,956  2,481 
Tax credits  6,002  6,609 
Net operating losses  2,557  2,965 
Operating leases  2,711  3,526 
Capitalized research and development(1) 10,381  17,757 
Other  2,289  1,951 
Total deferred tax assets  26,851  37,144 
Valuation allowance  (9,553)  (10,999) 
Total deferred tax assets net of valuation allowance  17,298  26,145 
Deferred tax liabilities:
Property and equipment, net  (6,607)  (8,189) 
Net investment gains  (2,361)  (2,405) 
Operating leases  (2,491)  (2,965) 
Other  (1,092)  (902) 
Total deferred tax liabilities  (12,551)  (14,461) 
Net deferred tax assets (liabilities) $ 4,747 $ 11,684 
(1)As required by the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, effective January 1, 2022, our research and development expenditures were 
capitalized and amortized which resulted in substantially higher cash taxes starting in 2022 with an equal amount of deferred 
tax benefit.  
As of December 31, 2023 , our federal, state, and foreign net operating loss carryforwards for income tax 
purposes were approximately $7.1 billion , $18.6 billion , and $1.8 billion  respectively. If not utilized, the federal net Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
84.  operating loss carryforwards will begin to expire in 202 4, foreign net operating loss carryforwards will begin to expire in 
2025 and the state net operating loss carryforwards will begin to expire in 2029. It is more likely than not that the 
majority of the net operating loss carryforwards will not be realized; therefore, we have recorded a valuation allowance 
against them. The net operating loss carryforwards are subject to various annual limitations under the tax laws of the 
different jurisdictions.
As of December 31, 2023 , our Federal and California research and development credit carryforwards for income 
tax purposes were approximately $600 million  and $6.3 billion , respectively. If not utilized, the Federal R&D credit will 
begin to expire in 2037 and the California R&D credit can be carried over indefinitely. We believe the majority of the 
federal tax credit and state tax credit is not likely to be realized.
As of December 31, 2023 , our investment tax credit carryforwards for state income tax purposes were 
approximately $1.0 billion  and will begin to expire in 2029. We use the flow-through method of accounting for 
investment tax credits. We believe this tax credit is not likely to be realized.
As of December 31, 2023 , we maintained a valuation allowance with respect to California deferred tax assets, 
certain federal net operating losses, certain state net operating losses and tax credits, net deferred tax assets relating 
to Other Bet companies, and certain foreign net operating losses that we believe are not likely to be realized. We 
continue to reassess the remaining valuation allowance quarterly, and if future evidence allows for a partial or full 
release of the valuation allowance, a tax benefit will be recorded accordingly. 
Uncertain Tax Positions
The following table summarizes the activity related to our gross unrecognized tax benefits (in millions):
 2021 2022 2023
Beginning gross unrecognized tax benefits $ 3,837 $ 5,158 $ 7,055 
Increases related to prior year tax positions  529  253  740 
Decreases related to prior year tax positions  (263)  (437)  (682) 
Decreases related to settlement with tax authorities  (329)  (140)  (21) 
Increases related to current year tax positions  1,384  2,221  2,346 
Ending gross unrecognized tax benefits $ 5,158 $ 7,055 $ 9,438 Year Ended December 31,
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in evaluating 
our uncertain tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes. The total amount of gross unrecognized tax 
benefits was $5.2 billion , $7.1 billion , and $9.4 billion  as of December 31, 2021 , 2022 , and 2023 , respectively, of which 
$3.7 billion , $5.3 billion , and $7.4 billion , if recognized, would affect our effective tax rate, respectively. 
As of December 31, 2022  and 2023 , we accrued $346 million  and $622 million  in interest and penalties in 
provision for income taxes, respectively.
We file income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction and in many state and foreign jurisdictions. Our two 
major tax jurisdictions are the U.S. federal and Ireland. We are subject to the continuous examination of our income tax 
returns by the IRS and other tax authorities. The IRS is currently examining our 2016 through 2021 tax returns. We 
have also received tax assessments in multiple foreign jurisdictions asserting transfer pricing adjustments or 
permanent establishment. We continue to defend such claims as presented.
The tax years 2016 through 2022 remain subject to examination by the appropriate governmental agencies for 
Irish tax purposes. There are other ongoing audits in various other jurisdictions that are not material to our financial 
statements.
We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the 
adequacy of our provision for income taxes. We continue to monitor the progress of ongoing discussions with tax 
authorities and the effect, if any, of the expected expiration of the statute of limitations in various taxing jurisdictions.
We believe that an adequate provision has been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. 
However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. If any issues addressed in our tax audits are 
resolved in a manner not consistent with management's expectations, we could be required to adjust our provision for 
income taxes in the period such resolutions occur. Although the timing of resolution, settlement, and closure of audits is 
not certain, it is reasonably possible that our unrecognized tax benefits from certain U.S. federal, state, and non U.S. 
tax positions could decrease by approximately $700 million  in the next 12 months. Positions that may be resolved 
include various U.S. and non-U.S. matters.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
85.  Note 15.        Information about Segments and Geographic Areas  
We report our segment results as Google Services, Google Cloud, and Other Bets:
•Google Services includes products and services such as ads, Android, Chrome, devices, Google Maps, 
Google Play, Search, and YouTube. Google Services generates revenues primarily from advertising;  fees 
received for consumer subscription-based products such as YouTube TV,  YouTube Music and Premium , and 
NFL Sunday Ticket; the sale of apps and in-app purchases and devices.
•Google Cloud includes infrastructure and platform services, collaboration tools, and other services for 
enterprise customers. Google Cloud generates revenues primarily from consumption-based fees and 
subscriptions received for Google Cloud Platform services, Google Workspace communication and 
collaboration tools, and other enterprise services.
•Other Bets is a combination of multiple operating segments that are not individually material. Revenues from 
Other Bets are generated primarily from the sale of health care-related services and internet services.
Revenues, certain costs, such as costs associated with content and traffic acquisition, certain engineering 
activities, and devices, as well as certain operating expenses are directly attributable to our segments. Due to the 
integrated nature of Alphabet, other costs and expenses, such as technical infrastructure and office facilities, are 
managed centrally at a consolidated level. These costs, including the associated depreciation and impairment, are 
allocated to operating segments as a service cost generally based on usage, headcount, or revenue.
Reflecting DeepMind's increasing collaboration with Google Services, Google Cloud, and Other Bets, beginning in 
the first quarter of 2023 DeepMind is reported as part of Alphabet-level activities instead of within Other Bets. 
Additionally, beginning in the first quarter of 2023, we updated and simplified our cost allocation methodologies to 
provide our business leaders with increased transparency for decision-making. Prior periods have been recast to 
conform to the current presentation.
As announced on April 20, 2023, we brought together part of Google Research (the Brain team) and DeepMind to 
significantly accelerate our progress in artificial intelligence (AI). The group, called Google DeepMind, is reported within 
Alphabet-level activities prospectively beginning in the second quarter of 2023. Previously, the Brain team was 
included within Google Services.
Certain costs are not allocated to our segments because they represent Alphabet-level activitie s. These costs 
primarily include AI-focused shared  R&D activities, including development costs of our general AI models ; corporate 
initiatives such as our philanthropic activities; corporate shared costs such as certain finance, human resource, and 
legal costs, including certain fines and settlements. Charges associated with reductions in our workforce and office 
space during 2023 were not allocated to our segments. Additionally, hedging gains (losses) related to revenue are not 
allocated to our segments.
Our operating segments are not evaluated using asset information.
The following table presents information about our segments (in millions) :
Year Ended December 31,
2021 2022 2023
Revenues:
Google Services $ 237,529 $ 253,528 $ 272,543 
Google Cloud  19,206  26,280  33,088 
Other Bets  753  1,068  1,527 
Hedging gains (losses)  149  1,960  236 
Total revenues $ 257,637 $ 282,836 $ 307,394 
Operating income (loss):
Google Services $ 88,132 $ 82,699 $ 95,858 
Google Cloud  (2,282)  (1,922)  1,716 
Other Bets  (4,051)  (4,636)  (4,095) 
Alphabet-level activities  (3,085)  (1,299)  (9,186) 
Total income from operations $ 78,714 $ 74,842 $ 84,293 
See Note 2  for information relating to revenues by geography.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
86.  The following table presents long-lived assets by geographic area, which includes property and equipment, net 
and operating lease assets (in millions):
As of December 31,
 2022 2023
Long-lived assets:
United States $ 93,565 $ 110,053 
International  33,484  38,383 
Total long-lived assets $ 127,049 $ 148,436 Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
87.  ITEM 9. CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL 
DISCLOSURE
None.
ITEM 9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Our management, with the participation of our chief executive officer and chief financial officer, evaluated the 
effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures pursuant to Rule 13a-15 under the Exchange Act, as of the 
end of the period covered by this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Based on this evaluation, our chief executive officer and chief financial officer concluded that, as of December 31, 
2023 , our disclosure controls and procedures are designed at a reasonable assurance level and are effective to 
provide reasonable assurance that information we are required to disclose in reports that we file or submit under the 
Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized, and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules 
and forms, and that such information is accumulated and communicated to our management, including our chief 
executive officer and chief financial officer, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
There have been no changes in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the quarter 
ended December 31, 2023  that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal 
control over financial reporting. 
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial 
reporting, as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) of the Exchange Act. Our management conducted an evaluation of the 
effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting based on the framework in Internal Control—Integrated 
Framework  issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework). 
Based on this evaluation, management concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was effective as of 
December 31, 2023 . Management reviewed the results of its assessment with our Audit and Compliance Committee. 
The effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2023  has been audited by Ernst & 
Young LLP , an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in its report which is included in Item 8 of this 
Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Limitations on Effectiveness of Controls and Procedures
In designing and evaluating the disclosure controls and procedures, management recognizes that any controls 
and procedures, no matter how well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable assurance of achieving the 
desired control objectives. In addition, the design of disclosure controls and procedures must reflect the fact that there 
are resource constraints and that management is required to apply its judgment in evaluating the benefits of possible 
controls and procedures relative to their costs.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
88.  ITEM 9B. OTHER INFORMATION
10b5-1 Trading Plans
During the fiscal quarter ended December 31, 2023 , the following Section 16 officer and directors adopted, 
modified or terminated  a “Rule 10b5-1 trading arrangement” (as defined in Item 408 of Regulation S-K of the Exchange 
Act):
•John Hennessy , Chair of t he Board of Directors , through the John L. Hennessy & Andrea J. Hennessy 
Revocable Trust, adopted  a new trading plan on November 1, 2023  (with the first trade under the new plan 
scheduled for February 12, 2024). The trading plan will be effective until March 12, 2025 to sell 6,664  shares of 
Class C Capital Stock and 11,336  shares of Class A Common Stock.
•Ann Mather , former member of the Board of Directors , terminated  her trading plan on October 30, 2023 , 
effective with her resignation from the Board of Directors. The trading plan previously permitted the sale of 
12,580  shares of Class C Capital Stock and would have been effective until June 2, 2024.
•Ruth M. Porat , President and Chief Investment Officer; Chief Financial Officer , adopted  a new trading plan on 
November 30, 2023  (with the first trade under the new plan scheduled for March 8, 2024). The trading plan will 
be effective until March 8, 2025 to sell all of the (net) shares of up to 82,900  (gross) Class C Capital Stock 
issued upon the vesting of her Alphabet 2021 Performance Stock Units, as adjusted based on performance 
(net shares are net of tax withholding).
There were no “non-Rule 10b5-1 trading arrangements” (as defined in Item 408 of Regulation S-K of the 
Exchange Act) adopted, modified or terminated  during the fiscal quarter ended December 31, 2023 by our directors 
and Section 16 officers. Each of the Rule 10b5-1 trading arrangements are in accordance with our Policy Against 
Insider Trading and actual sale transactions made pursuant to such trading arrangements will be disclosed publicly in 
Section 16 filings with the SEC in accordance with applicable securities laws, rules and regulations.
Required Disclosure Pursuant to Section 13(r) of the Exchange Act
As previously disclosed, Google LLC, a subsidiary of Alphabet, filed notifications with the Russian Federal 
Security Service pursuant to Russian encryption control requirements, which must be complied with prior to the import 
of covered items. The information provided pursuant to Section 13(r) of the Exchange Act in Part II, Item 5 of our 
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2023 is incorporated herein by reference.
ITEM 9C.  DISCLOSURE REGARDING FOREIGN JURISDICTIONS THAT PREVENT INSPECTIONS
Not applicable.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
89.  PART III
ITEM 10. DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS, AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
The information required by this item will be included under the caption “Directors, Executive Officers, and 
Corporate Governance” in our Proxy Statement for the 2024  Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC 
within 120 days of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2023  (2024  Proxy Statement) and is incorporated herein by 
reference. The information required by this item regarding delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K will 
be included under the caption “Delinquent Section 16(a) Reports” in the 2024  Proxy Statement and is incorporated 
herein by reference.
ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
The information required by this item will be included under the captions “Director Compensation,” “Executive 
Compensation” and “Directors, Executive Officers, and Corporate Governance—Corporate Governance and Board 
Matters—Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation” in the 2024  Proxy Statement and is 
incorporated herein by reference , except as to information disclosed therein pursuant to Item 402(v) of Regulation S-K 
relating to pay versus performance .
ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED 
STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
The information required by this item will be included under the captions “Common Stock Ownership of Certain 
Beneficial Owners and Management” and “Equity Compensation Plan Information” in the 2024  Proxy Statement and is 
incorporated herein by reference.
ITEM 13. CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
The information required by this item will be included under the captions “Certain Relationships and Related 
Transactions” and “Directors, Executive Officers, and Corporate Governance—Corporate Governance and Board 
Matters—Director Independence” in the 2024  Proxy Statement and is incorporated herein by reference.
ITEM 14. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
The information required by this item will be included under the caption “Independent Registered Public 
Accounting Firm” in the 2024  Proxy Statement and is incorporated herein by reference.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
90.  PART IV
ITEM 15. EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES
We have filed the following documents as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K:
1. Consolidated Financial Statements
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 48
Financial Statements:
Consolidated Balance Sheets 51
Consolidated Statements of Income 52
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income 53
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity 54
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 55
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 56
2. Financial Statement Schedules
Schedule II: Valuation and Qualifying Accounts
The table below details the activity of the allowance for credit losses and sales credits for the years ended 
December 31, 2021 , 2022 , and 2023  (in millions):
Balance at
Beginning of Year Additions UsageBalance at
End of Year
Year ended December 31, 2021 $ 1,344 $ 2,092 $ (2,047) $ 1,389 
Year ended December 31, 2022 $ 1,389 $ 2,125 $ (2,301) $ 1,213 
Year ended December 31, 2023 $ 1,213 $ 3,115 $ (2,737) $ 1,591 
Note: Additions to the allowance for credit losses are charged to expense. Additions to the allowance for sales credits are charged against 
revenues.
All other schedules have been omitted because they are not required, not applicable, or the required information 
is otherwise included.
3. Exhibits
2.01 Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated 
October 2, 2015, by and among Google Inc., 
the Registrant and Maple Technologies Inc.Current Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580) October 2, 2015
3.01 Amended and Restated Certificate of 
Incorporation of the RegistrantCurrent Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580) June 3, 2022
3.02 Amended and Restated Bylaws of the 
Registrant, dated October 19, 2022Current Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)October 25, 2022
4.01 Specimen Class A Common Stock certificate Current Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)October 2, 2015
4.02 Specimen Class C Capital Stock certificate Current Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)October 2, 2015
4.03 Alphabet Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan Current Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)October 2, 2015
4.04 Transfer Restriction Agreement, dated 
October 2, 2015, between the Registrant and 
Larry Page and certain of his affiliates Current Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)October 2, 2015
4.05 Transfer Restriction Agreement, dated 
October 2, 2015, between the Registrant and 
Sergey Brin and certain of his affiliates Current Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)October 2, 2015
4.06 Joinder Agreement, dated December 31, 
2021, among the Registrant, Sergey Brin and 
certain of his affiliates  Annual Report on Form 10-K 
(File No. 001-37580)February 2, 2022Exhibit
Number DescriptionIncorporated by reference herein
Form DateTable of Contents Alphabet Inc.
91.  4.07 Transfer Restriction Agreement, dated 
October 2, 2015, between the Registrant and 
Eric E. Schmidt and certain of its affiliatesCurrent Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)October 2, 2015
4.08 Class C Undertaking, dated October 2, 2015, 
executed by the RegistrantCurrent Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)October 2, 2015
4.09 Indenture, dated February 12, 2016, between 
the Registrant and The Bank of New York 
Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as TrusteeRegistration Statement on 
Form S-3 
(File No. 333-209510)February 12, 2016
4.10 Registrant Registration Rights Agreement 
dated December 14, 2015Registration Statement on 
Form S-3 
(File No. 333-209518)February 12, 2016
4.11 First Supplemental Indenture, dated April 27, 
2016, between the Registrant and The Bank 
of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as 
trusteeCurrent Report on Form 8-K
(File No. 001-37580)April 27, 2016
4.12 Form of the Registrant’s 3.375% Notes due 
2024 (included in Exhibit 4.11)
4.13 Form of the Registrant’s 1.998% Note due 
2026Current Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)August 9, 2016
4.14 Form of Global Note representing the 
Registrant’s 0.450% notes due 2025Current Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)August 5, 2020
4.15 Form of Global Note representing the 
Registrant’s 0.800% notes due 2027Current Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)August 5, 2020
4.16 Form of Global Note representing the 
Registrant’s 1.100% notes due 2030Current Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)August 5, 2020
4.17 Form of Global Note representing the 
Registrant’s 1.900% notes due 2040Current Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)August 5, 2020
4.18 Form of Global Note representing the 
Registrant’s 2.050% notes due 2050Current Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)August 5, 2020
4.19 Form of Global Note representing the 
Registrant’s 2.250% notes due 2060Current Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)August 5, 2020
4.20 Description of Registrant’s Securities Annual Report on Form 10-K 
(File No. 001-37580)February 3, 2023
10.01 u Form of Indemnification Agreement entered 
into between the Registrant, its affiliates and 
its directors and officers Current Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)October 2, 2015
10.02 u*Form of Offer Letter for Directors
10.03 u Offer Letter, dated March 20, 2015, between 
Ruth Porat and Google Inc., as assumed by 
the Registrant on October 2, 2015Current Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-36380)March 26, 2015
10.04 u Compensation Plan Agreement, dated 
October 2, 2015, between Google Inc. and 
the RegistrantCurrent Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)October 2, 2015
10.05 u Director Arrangements Agreement, dated 
October 2, 2015, between Google Inc. and 
the RegistrantCurrent Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)October 2, 2015
10.06 u Alphabet Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan Current Report on Form 8-K 
(File No. 001-37580)October 2, 2015
10.07 u Alphabet Inc. Amended and Restated 2012 
Stock PlanCurrent Report on Form 8-K
(File No. 001-37580)June 5, 2020
10.07.1 u Alphabet Inc. Amended and Restated 2012 
Stock Plan - Form of Alphabet Restricted 
Stock Unit AgreementAnnual Report on Form 10-K
(File No. 001-37580)February 4, 2020
10.07.2 u Alphabet Inc. 2012 Stock Plan - Form of 
Alphabet Restricted Stock Unit AgreementQuarterly Report on Form 10-
Q  (File No. 001-37580)November 3, 
2016Exhibit
Number DescriptionIncorporated by reference herein
Form DateTable of Contents Alphabet Inc.
92.  10.08 u Alphabet Inc. Amended and Restated 2021 
Stock PlanCurrent Report on Form 8-K 
(file No. 001-37580)June 3, 2022
10.08.1 u Alphabet Inc. Amended and Restated 2021 
Stock Plan - Form of Alphabet Restricted 
Stock Unit AgreementQuarterly Report on Form 10-
Q (file No. 001-37580)July 28, 2021
10.08.2 u Alphabet Inc. Amended and Restated 2021 
Stock Plan - Form of Alphabet Restricted 
Stock Unit AgreementQuarterly Report on Form 10-
Q (File No. 001-37580)July 26, 2023
10.08.3 u Alphabet Inc. Amended and Restated 2021 
Stock Plan - Form of Alphabet 2022 CEO 
Performance Stock Unit AgreementAnnual Report on Form 10-K 
(File No. 001-37580) February 3, 2023
10.08.4 u Alphabet Inc. Amended and Restated 2021 
Stock Plan - Form of Alphabet 2022 Non-
CEO Performance Stock Unit AgreementAnnual Report on Form 10-K
(File No. 001-37580)February 4, 2020
10.08.5 u Alphabet Inc. Amended and Restated 2021 
Stock Plan - Form of Alphabet 2023 Non-
CEO Performance Stock Unit AgreementQuarterly Report on Form 10-
Q (File No. 001-37580)July 26, 2023
10.09 u Alphabet Inc. Company Bonus Plan, as 
amendedAnnual Report on Form 10-K
(File No. 001-37350)February 2, 2023
21.01 * Subsidiaries of the Registrant
23.01 * Consent of Independent Registered Public 
Accounting Firm
24.01 * Power of Attorney (incorporated by reference 
to the signature page of this Annual Report 
on Form 10-K)
31.01 * Certification of Chief Executive Officer 
pursuant to Exchange Act Rules 13a-14(a) 
and 15d-14(a), as adopted pursuant to 
Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 
2002
31.02 * Certification of Chief Financial Officer 
pursuant to Exchange Act Rules 13a-14(a) 
and 15d-14(a), as adopted pursuant to 
Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 
2002
32.01 ‡ Certifications of Chief Executive Officer and 
Chief Financial Officer pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 
Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to 
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 
2002
97.01 * Clawback Policy
101.INS * Inline XBRL Instance Document - the 
instance document does not appear in the 
Interactive Data File because its XBRL tags 
are embedded within the Inline XBRL 
document
101.SCH * Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema 
Document
101.CAL * Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation 
Linkbase Document
101.DEF * Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition 
Linkbase Document
101.LAB * Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label 
Linkbase DocumentExhibit
Number DescriptionIncorporated by reference herein
Form DateTable of Contents Alphabet Inc.
93.  101.PRE * Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension 
Presentation Linkbase Document
104 Cover Page Interactive Data File (embedded 
within the Inline XBRL document and 
contained in Exhibit 101)Exhibit
Number DescriptionIncorporated by reference herein
Form Date
_________________
u Indicates management compensatory plan, contract, or arrangement.
* Filed herewith.
‡ Furnished herewith.
ITEM 16. FORM 10-K SUMMARY
None.Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
94.  SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Registrant has 
duly caused this Annual Report on Form 10-K to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
Date: January 30, 2024  
 ALPHABET INC.
By: /S/    S UNDAR  PICHAI        
Sundar Pichai
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer of the Registrant)
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below constitutes 
and appoints Sundar Pichai and Ruth M. Porat, jointly and severally, his or her attorney-in-fact, with the power of 
substitution, for him or her in any and all capacities, to sign any amendments to this Annual Report on Form 10-K and 
to file the same, with exhibits thereto and other documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange 
Commission, hereby ratifying and confirming all that each of said attorneys-in-fact, or his or her substitute or 
substitutes, may do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this Annual Report on Form 10-K has been 
signed below by the following persons on behalf of the Registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
 
 Table of Contents Alphabet Inc.
95.  Signature Title Date
/S/    S UNDAR  PICHAIChief Executive Officer and Director (Principal 
Executive Officer) January 30, 2024
Sundar Pichai
/S/    R UTH M. P ORAT        President and Chief Investment Officer; Chief 
Financial Officer (Principal Financial Officer) January 30, 2024
Ruth M. Porat
/S/    A MIE THUENER  O'T OOLE        Vice President, Corporate Controller and 
Principal Accounting Officer January 30, 2024
Amie Thuener O'Toole
/S/    F RANCES H. A RNOLD        Director January 30, 2024
Frances H. Arnold
/S/    S ERGEY  BRIN        Co-Founder and Director January 30, 2024
Sergey Brin
/S/   R. M ARTIN  CHAVEZ       Director January 30, 2024
R. Martin Chávez
/S/    L. J OHN DOERR        Director January 30, 2024
L. John Doerr
/S/    R OGER  W. F ERGUSON JR.       Director January 30, 2024
Roger W. Ferguson Jr.
/S/    J OHN L. H ENNESSY         Director, Chair January 30, 2024
John L. Hennessy
/S/    L ARRY  PAGE        Co-Founder and Director January 30, 2024
Larry Page
/S/    K. R AM SHRIRAM       Director January 30, 2024
K. Ram Shriram
/S/    R OBIN L. W ASHINGTON       Director January 30, 2024
Robin L. WashingtonTable of Contents Alphabet Inc.
96.  UNITED	STATES
SECURITIES	AND	EXCHANGE	COMMISSION
Washington,	D.C.	20549
FORM	
10-K
(Mark	One)
x
ANNUAL	REPORT	PURSUANT	TO	SECTION	13	OR	15(d)	OF	THE	SECURITIES	EXCHANGE	ACT	OF	1934
For	the	fiscal	year	ended	
December	31
,	2023
OR
o
TRANSITION	REPORT	PURSUANT	TO	SECTION	13	OR	15(d)	OF	THE	SECURITIES	EXCHANGE	ACT	OF	1934
For	the	transition	period	from	_________	to	_________
Commission	File	Number:	
001-34756
Tesla,	Inc.
(Exact	name	of	registrant	as	specified	in	its	charter)
Delaware
91-2197729
(State	or	other	jurisdiction	of
incorporation	or	organization)
(I.R.S.	Employer
Identification	No.)
1	Tesla	Road
Austin
,	
Texas
78725
(Address	of	principal	executive	offices)
(Zip	Code)
(
512
)	
516-8177
(Registrant’s	telephone	number,	including	area	code)
Securities	registered	pursuant	to	Section	12(b)	of	the	Act:
Title	of	each	class
Trading	Symbol(s)
Name	of	each	exchange	on	which	registered
Common	stock
TSLA
The	Nasdaq	Global	Select	Market
Securities	registered	pursuant	to	Section	12(g)	of	the	Act:
None
Indicate	by	check	mark	whether	the	registrant	is	a	well-known	seasoned	issuer,	as	defined	in	Rule	405	of	the	Securities	Act.	
Yes
	
x
	No	
o
Indicate	by	check	mark	if	the	registrant	is	not	required	to	file	reports	pursuant	to	Section	13	or	15(d)	of	the	Act.	Yes	
o
	
No
	
x
Indicate	by	check	mark	whether	the	registrant	(1)	has	filed	all	reports	required	to	be	filed	by	Section	13	or	15(d)	of	the	Securities	Exchange	Act	of	1934	(“Exchange	Act”)
during	the	preceding	12	months	(or	for	such	shorter	period	that	the	registrant	was	required	to	file	such	reports),	and	(2)	has	been	subject	to	such	filing	requirements	for	the	past	90
days.	
Yes
	
x
	No	
o
Indicate	by	check	mark	whether	the	registrant	has	submitted	electronically	every	Interactive	Data	File	required	to	be	submitted	pursuant	to	Rule	405	of	Regulation	S-T
(§232.405	of	this	chapter)	during	the	preceding	12	months	(or	for	such	shorter	period	that	the	registrant	was	required	to	submit	such	files).	
Yes
	
x
	No	
o
Indicate	by	check	mark	whether	the	registrant	is	a	large	accelerated	filer,	an	accelerated	filer,	a	non-accelerated	filer,	a	smaller	reporting	company,	or	an	emerging	growth
company.	See	the	definitions	of	“large	accelerated	filer,”	“accelerated	filer,”	“smaller	reporting	company”	and	“emerging	growth	company”	in	Rule	12b-2	of	the	Exchange	Act:
Large	accelerated	filer
x
	
Accelerated	filer
o
Non-accelerated	filer
o
	
Smaller	reporting	company
o
Emerging	growth	company
o
	If	an	emerging	growth	company,	indicate	by	check	mark	if	the	registrant	has	elected	not	to	use	the	extended	transition	period	for	complying	with	any	new	or	revised	financial
accounting	standards	provided	pursuant	to	Section	13(a)	of	the	Exchange	Act.	
o
Indicate	by	check	mark	whether	the	Registrant	has	filed	a	report	on	and	attestation	to	its	management’s	assessment	of	the	effectiveness	of	its	internal	control	over	financial
reporting	under	Section	404(b)	of	the	Sarbanes-Oxley	Act	(15	U.S.C.	7262(b))	by	the	registered	public	accounting	firm	that	prepared	or	issued	its	audit	report.	
x
If	securities	are	registered	pursuant	to	Section	12(b)	of	the	Act,	indicate	by	check	mark	whether	the	financial	statements	of	the	registrant	included	in	the	filing	reflect	the
correction	of	an	error	to	previously	issued	financial	statements.	
o
Indicate	by	check	mark	whether	any	of	those	error	corrections	are	restatements	that	required	a	recovery	analysis	of	incentive-based	compensation	received	by	any	of	the
registrant’s	executive	officers	during	the	relevant	recovery	period	pursuant	to	§240.10D-1(b).	
o
Indicate	by	check	mark	whether	the	registrant	is	a	shell	company	(as	defined	in	Rule	12b-2	of	the	Exchange	Act).	Yes	
o
	No	
x
The	aggregate	market	value	of	voting	stock	held	by	non-affiliates	of	the	registrant,	as	of	June	30,	2023,	the	last	day	of	the	registrant’s	most	recently	completed	second	fiscal
quarter,	was	$
722.52
	billion	(based	on	the	closing	price	for	shares	of	the	registrant’s	Common	Stock	as	reported	by	the	NASDAQ	Global	Select	Market	on	June	30,	2023).	Shares	of
Common	Stock	held	by	each	executive	officer	and	director	have	been	excluded	in	that	such	persons	may	be	deemed	to	be	affiliates.	This	determination	of	affiliate	status	is	not
necessarily	a	conclusive	determination	for	other	purposes.
As	of	January	22,	2024,	there	were	
3,184,790,415
	shares	of	the	registrant’s	common	stock	outstanding.
DOCUMENTS	INCORPORATED	BY	REFERENCE
Portions	of	the	registrant’s	Proxy	Statement	for	the	2024	Annual	Meeting	of	Stockholders	are	incorporated	herein	by	reference	in	Part	III	of	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K	to
the	extent	stated	herein.	Such	proxy	statement	will	be	filed	with	the	Securities	and	Exchange	Commission	within	120	days	of	the	registrant’s	fiscal	year	ended	December	31,	2023.TESLA,	INC.
ANNUAL	REPORT	ON	FORM	10-K	FOR	THE	YEAR	ENDED	DECEMBER	31,	2023
INDEX
	
	
Page
PART	I.
	
	
Item	1.
Business
4
Item	1A.
Risk	Factors
14
Item	1B.
Unresolved	Staff	Comments
28
Item	1C.
Cybersecurity
29
Item	2.
Properties
30
Item	3.
Legal	Proceedings
30
Item	4.
Mine	Safety	Disclosures
30
	
PART	II.
	
Item	5.
Market	for	Registrant's	Common	Equity,	Related	Stockholder	Matters	and	Issuer	Purchases	of	Equity	Securities
31
Item	6.
[Reserved]
32
Item	7.
Management's	Discussion	and	Analysis	of	Financial	Condition	and	Results	of	Operations
33
Item	7A.
Quantitative	and	Qualitative	Disclosures	about	Market	Risk
45
Item	8.
Financial	Statements	and	Supplementary	Data
46
Item	9.
Changes	in	and	Disagreements	with	Accountants	on	Accounting	and	Financial	Disclosure
93
Item	9A.
Controls	and	Procedures
93
Item	9B.
Other	Information
94
Item	9C.
Disclosure	Regarding	Foreign	Jurisdictions	that	Prevent	Inspections
94
	
PART	III.
	
Item	10.
Directors,	Executive	Officers	and	Corporate	Governance
95
Item	11.
Executive	Compensation
95
Item	12.
Security	Ownership	of	Certain	Beneficial	Owners	and	Management	and	Related	Stockholder	Matters
95
Item	13.
Certain	Relationships	and	Related	Transactions,	and	Director	Independence
95
Item	14.
Principal	Accountant	Fees	and	Services
95
	
PART	IV.
	
Item	15.
Exhibits	and	Financial	Statement	Schedules
96
Item	16.
Summary
111
	
SignaturesTable	of	Contents
Forward-Looking	Statements
The	discussions	in	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K	contain	forward-looking	statements	reflecting	our	current	expectations	that	involve	risks	and
uncertainties.	These	forward-looking	statements	include,	but	are	not	limited	to,	statements	concerning	supply	chain	constraints,	our	strategy,
competition,	future	operations	and	production	capacity,	future	financial	position,	future	revenues,	projected	costs,	profitability,	expected	cost	reductions,
capital	adequacy,	expectations	regarding	demand	and	acceptance	for	our	technologies,	growth	opportunities	and	trends	in	the	markets	in	which	we
operate,	prospects	and	plans	and	objectives	of	management.	The	words	“anticipates,”	“believes,”	“could,”	“estimates,”	“expects,”	“intends,”	“may,”
“plans,”	“projects,”	“will,”	“would”	and	similar	expressions	are	intended	to	identify	forward-looking	statements,	although	not	all	forward-looking
statements	contain	these	identifying	words.	We	may	not	actually	achieve	the	plans,	intentions	or	expectations	disclosed	in	our	forward-looking
statements	and	you	should	not	place	undue	reliance	on	our	forward-looking	statements.	Actual	results	or	events	could	differ	materially	from	the	plans,
intentions	and	expectations	disclosed	in	the	forward-looking	statements	that	we	make.	These	forward-looking	statements	involve	risks	and	uncertainties
that	could	cause	our	actual	results	to	differ	materially	from	those	in	the	forward-looking	statements,	including,	without	limitation,	the	risks	set	forth	in	Part
I,	Item	1A,	“Risk	Factors”	of	the	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K	for	the	fiscal	year	ended	December	31,	2023	and	that	are	otherwise	described	or	updated
from	time	to	time	in	our	other	filings	with	the	Securities	and	Exchange	Commission	(the	“SEC”).	The	discussion	of	such	risks	is	not	an	indication	that	any
such	risks	have	occurred	at	the	time	of	this	filing.	We	do	not	assume	any	obligation	to	update	any	forward-looking	statements.Table	of	Contents
PART	I
ITEM	1.	BUSINESS
Overview
We	design,	develop,	manufacture,	sell	and	lease	high-performance	fully	electric	vehicles	and	energy	generation	and	storage	systems,	and	offer
services	related	to	our	products.	We	generally	sell	our	products	directly	to	customers,	and	continue	to	grow	our	customer-facing	infrastructure	through	a
global	network	of	vehicle	showrooms	and	service	centers,	Mobile	Service,	body	shops,	Supercharger	stations	and	Destination	Chargers	to	accelerate	the
widespread	adoption	of	our	products.	We	emphasize	performance,	attractive	styling	and	the	safety	of	our	users	and	workforce	in	the	design	and
manufacture	of	our	products	and	are	continuing	to	develop	full	self-driving	technology	for	improved	safety.	We	also	strive	to	lower	the	cost	of	ownership
for	our	customers	through	continuous	efforts	to	reduce	manufacturing	costs	and	by	offering	financial	and	other	services	tailored	to	our	products.
Our	mission	is	to	accelerate	the	world’s	transition	to	sustainable	energy.	We	believe	that	this	mission,	along	with	our	engineering	expertise,
vertically	integrated	business	model	and	focus	on	user	experience	differentiate	us	from	other	companies.
Segment	Information
We	operate	as	two	reportable	segments:	(i)	automotive	and	(ii)	energy	generation	and	storage.
The	automotive	segment	includes	the	design,	development,	manufacturing,	sales	and	leasing	of	high-performance	fully	electric	vehicles	as	well	as
sales	of	automotive	regulatory	credits.	Additionally,	the	automotive	segment	also	includes	services	and	other,	which	includes	sales	of	used	vehicles,	non-
warranty	after-sales	vehicle	services,	body	shop	and	parts,	paid	Supercharging,	vehicle	insurance	revenue	and	retail	merchandise.	The	energy	generation
and	storage	segment	includes	the	design,	manufacture,	installation,	sales	and	leasing	of	solar	energy	generation	and	energy	storage	products	and	related
services	and	sales	of	solar	energy	systems	incentives.
Our	Products	and	Services
Automotive
We	currently	manufacture	five	different	consumer	vehicles	–	the	Model	3,	Y,	S,	X	and	Cybertruck.	Model	3	is	a	four-door	mid-size	sedan	that	we
designed	for	manufacturability	with	a	base	price	for	mass-market	appeal.	Model	Y	is	a	compact	sport	utility	vehicle	(“SUV”)	built	on	the	Model	3	platform
with	seating	for	up	to	seven	adults.	Model	S	is	a	four-door	full-size	sedan	and	Model	X	is	a	mid-size	SUV	with	seating	for	up	to	seven	adults.	Model	S	and
Model	X	feature	the	highest	performance	characteristics	and	longest	ranges	that	we	offer	in	a	sedan	and	SUV,	respectively.	In	November	2023,	we
entered	the	consumer	pickup	truck	market	with	first	deliveries	of	the	Cybertruck,	a	full-size	electric	pickup	truck	with	a	stainless	steel	exterior	that	has
the	utility	and	strength	of	a	truck	while	featuring	the	speed	of	a	sports	car.
In	2022,	we	also	began	early	production	and	deliveries	of	a	commercial	electric	vehicle,	the	Tesla	Semi.	We	have	planned	electric	vehicles	to
address	additional	vehicle	markets,	and	to	continue	leveraging	developments	in	our	proprietary	Full	Self-Driving	(“FSD”)	Capability	features,	battery	cell
and	other	technologies.
Energy	Generation	and	Storage
Energy	Storage	Products
Powerwall	and	Megapack	are	our	lithium-ion	battery	energy	storage	products.	Powerwall,	which	we	sell	directly	to	customers,	as	well	as	through
channel	partners,	is	designed	to	store	energy	at	a	home	or	small	commercial	facility.	Megapack	is	an	energy	storage	solution	for	commercial,	industrial,
utility	and	energy	generation	customers,	multiple	of	which	may	be	grouped	together	to	form	larger	installations	of	gigawatt	hours	(“GWh”)	or	greater
capacity.
We	also	continue	to	develop	software	capabilities	for	remotely	controlling	and	dispatching	our	energy	storage	systems	across	a	wide	range	of
markets	and	applications,	including	through	our	real-time	energy	control	and	optimization	platforms.
4Table	of	Contents
Solar	Energy	Offerings
We	sell	retrofit	solar	energy	systems	to	customers	and	channel	partners	and	also	make	them	available	through	power	purchase	agreement	(“PPA”)
arrangements.	We	purchase	most	of	the	components	for	our	retrofit	solar	energy	systems	from	multiple	sources	to	ensure	competitive	pricing	and
adequate	supply.	We	also	design	and	manufacture	certain	components	for	our	solar	energy	products.
We	sell	our	Solar	Roof,	which	combines	premium	glass	roof	tiles	with	energy	generation,	directly	to	customers,	as	well	as	through	channel
customers.	We	continue	to	improve	our	installation	capability	and	efficiency,	including	through	collaboration	with	real	estate	developers	and	builders	on
new	homes.
Technology
Automotive
Battery	and	Powertrain
Our	core	vehicle	technology	competencies	include	powertrain	engineering	and	manufacturing	and	our	ability	to	design	vehicles	that	utilize	the
unique	advantages	of	an	electric	powertrain.	We	have	designed	our	proprietary	powertrain	systems	to	be	adaptable,	efficient,	reliable	and	cost-effective
while	withstanding	the	rigors	of	an	automotive	environment.	We	offer	dual	motor	powertrain	vehicles,	which	use	two	electric	motors	to	maximize	traction
and	performance	in	an	all-wheel	drive	configuration,	as	well	as	vehicle	powertrain	technology	featuring	three	electric	motors	for	further	increased
performance	in	certain	versions	of	Model	S	and	Model	X,	Cybertruck	and	the	Tesla	Semi.
We	maintain	extensive	testing	and	R&D	capabilities	for	battery	cells,	packs	and	systems,	and	have	built	an	expansive	body	of	knowledge	on	lithium-
ion	cell	chemistry	types	and	performance	characteristics.	In	order	to	enable	a	greater	supply	of	cells	for	our	products	with	higher	energy	density	at	lower
costs,	we	have	developed	a	new	proprietary	lithium-ion	battery	cell	and	improved	manufacturing	processes.
Vehicle	Control	and	Infotainment	Software
The	performance	and	safety	systems	of	our	vehicles	and	their	battery	packs	utilize	sophisticated	control	software.	Control	systems	in	our	vehicles
optimize	performance,	customize	vehicle	behavior,	manage	charging	and	control	all	infotainment	functions.	We	develop	almost	all	of	this	software,
including	most	of	the	user	interfaces,	internally	and	update	our	vehicles’	software	regularly	through	over-the-air	updates.
Self-Driving	Development	and	Artificial	Intelligence
We	have	expertise	in	developing	technologies,	systems	and	software	to	enable	self-driving	vehicles	using	primarily	vision-based	technologies.	Our
FSD	Computer	runs	our	neural	networks	in	our	vehicles,	and	we	are	also	developing	additional	computer	hardware	to	better	enable	the	massive	amounts
of	field	data	captured	by	our	vehicles	to	continually	train	and	improve	these	neural	networks	for	real-world	performance.
Currently,	we	offer	in	our	vehicles	certain	advanced	driver	assist	systems	under	our	Autopilot	and	FSD	Capability	options.	Although	at	present	the
driver	is	ultimately	responsible	for	controlling	the	vehicle,	our	systems	provide	safety	and	convenience	functionality	that	relieves	drivers	of	the	most
tedious	and	potentially	dangerous	aspects	of	road	travel	much	like	the	system	that	airplane	pilots	use,	when	conditions	permit.	As	with	other	vehicle
systems,	we	improve	these	functions	in	our	vehicles	over	time	through	over-the-air	updates.
We	intend	to	establish	in	the	future	an	autonomous	Tesla	ride-hailing	network,	which	we	expect	would	also	allow	us	to	access	a	new	customer	base
even	as	modes	of	transportation	evolve.
We	are	also	applying	our	artificial	intelligence	learnings	from	self-driving	technology	to	the	field	of	robotics,	such	as	through	Optimus,	a	robotic
humanoid	in	development,	which	is	controlled	by	the	same	AI	system.
5Table	of	Contents
Energy	Generation	and	Storage
Energy	Storage	Products
We	leverage	many	of	the	component-level	technologies	from	our	vehicles	in	our	energy	storage	products.	By	taking	a	modular	approach	to	the
design	of	battery	systems,	we	can	optimize	manufacturing	capacity	of	our	energy	storage	products.	Additionally,	our	expertise	in	power	electronics
enables	our	battery	systems	to	interconnect	with	electricity	grids	while	providing	fast-acting	systems	for	power	injection	and	absorption.	We	have	also
developed	software	to	remotely	control	and	dispatch	our	energy	storage	systems.
Solar	Energy	Systems
We	have	engineered	Solar	Roof	over	numerous	iterations	to	combine	aesthetic	appeal	and	durability	with	power	generation.	The	efficiency	of	our
solar	energy	products	is	aided	by	our	own	solar	inverter,	which	incorporates	our	power	electronics	technologies.	We	designed	both	products	to	integrate
with	Powerwall.
Design	and	Engineering
Automotive
We	have	established	significant	in-house	capabilities	in	the	design	and	test	engineering	of	electric	vehicles	and	their	components	and	systems.	Our
team	has	significant	experience	in	computer-aided	design	as	well	as	durability,	strength	and	crash	test	simulations,	which	reduces	the	product
development	time	of	new	models.	We	have	also	achieved	complex	engineering	feats	in	stamping,	casting	and	thermal	systems,	and	developed	a	method
to	integrate	batteries	directly	with	vehicle	body	structures	without	separate	battery	packs	to	optimize	manufacturability,	weight,	range	and	cost
characteristics.
We	are	also	expanding	our	manufacturing	operations	globally	while	taking	action	to	localize	our	vehicle	designs	and	production	for	particular
markets,	including	country-specific	market	demands	and	factory	optimizations	for	local	workforces.	As	we	increase	our	capabilities,	particularly	in	the
areas	of	automation,	die-making	and	line-building,	we	are	also	making	strides	in	the	simulations	modeling	these	capabilities	prior	to	construction.
Energy	Generation	and	Storage
Our	expertise	in	electrical,	mechanical,	civil	and	software	engineering	allows	us	to	design,	engineer,	manufacture	and	install	energy	generating	and
storage	products	and	components,	including	at	the	residential	through	utility	scale.	For	example,	the	modular	design	of	our	Megapack	utility-scale	battery
line	is	intended	to	significantly	reduce	the	amount	of	assembly	required	in	the	field.	We	also	customize	solutions	including	our	energy	storage	products,
solar	energy	systems	and/or	Solar	Roof	for	customers	to	meet	their	specific	needs.
Sales	and	Marketing
Historically,	we	have	been	able	to	achieve	sales	without	traditional	advertising	and	at	relatively	low	marketing	costs.	We	continue	to	monitor	our
public	narrative	and	brand,	and	tailor	our	marketing	efforts	accordingly,	including	through	investments	in	customer	education	and	advertising	as
necessary.
Automotive
Direct	Sales
Our	vehicle	sales	channels	currently	include	our	website	and	an	international	network	of	company-owned	stores.	In	some	jurisdictions,	we	also	have
galleries	to	educate	and	inform	customers	about	our	products,	but	such	locations	do	not	transact	in	the	sale	of	vehicles.	We	believe	this	infrastructure
enables	us	to	better	control	costs	of	inventory,	manage	warranty	service	and	pricing,	educate	consumers	about	electric	vehicles,	make	our	vehicles	more
affordable,	maintain	and	strengthen	the	Tesla	brand	and	obtain	rapid	customer	feedback.
We	reevaluate	our	sales	strategy	both	globally	and	at	a	location-by-location	level	from	time	to	time	to	optimize	our	sales	channels.	However,	sales
of	vehicles	in	the	automobile	industry	tend	to	be	cyclical	in	many	markets,	which	may	expose	us	to	volatility	from	time	to	time.
6Table	of	Contents
Used	Vehicle	Sales
Our	used	vehicle	business	supports	new	vehicle	sales	by	integrating	the	trade-in	of	a	customer’s	existing	Tesla	or	non-Tesla	vehicle	with	the	sale	of
a	new	or	used	Tesla	vehicle.	The	Tesla	and	non-Tesla	vehicles	we	acquire	as	trade-ins	are	subsequently	remarketed,	either	directly	by	us	or	through	third
parties.	We	also	remarket	used	Tesla	vehicles	acquired	from	other	sources	including	lease	returns.
Public	Charging
We	have	a	growing	global	network	of	Tesla	Superchargers,	which	are	our	industrial-grade,	high-speed	vehicle	chargers.	Where	possible,	we	co-
locate	Superchargers	with	our	solar	and	energy	storage	systems	to	reduce	costs	and	promote	renewable	power.	Supercharger	stations	are	typically
placed	along	well-traveled	routes	and	in	and	around	dense	city	centers	to	allow	vehicle	owners	the	ability	to	enjoy	quick,	reliable	charging	along	an
extensive	network	with	convenient	stops.	Use	of	the	Supercharger	network	either	requires	payment	of	a	fee	or	is	free	under	certain	sales	programs.	In
November	2021,	we	began	to	offer	Supercharger	access	to	non-Tesla	vehicles	in	certain	locations	in	support	of	our	mission	to	accelerate	the	world’s
transition	to	sustainable	energy,	and	in	November	2022,	we	opened	up	our	previously	proprietary	charging	connector	as	the	North	American	Charging
Standard	(NACS).	This	enables	all	electric	vehicles	and	charging	stations	to	interoperate	
—
	which	makes	charging	easier	and	more	efficient	for	everyone
and	advances	our	mission	to	accelerate	the	world’s	transition	to	sustainable	energy.
	
Following	this,	a	number	of	major	automotive	companies	announced
their	adoption	of	NACS,	with	their	access	to	the	Supercharger	network	beginning	in	phases	in	2024	and	their	production	of	NACS	vehicles	beginning	no
later	than	2025.	We	also	engaged	SAE	International	to	govern	NACS	as	an	industry	standard,	now	named	J3400.	We	continue	to	monitor	and	increase	our
network	of	Tesla	Superchargers	in	anticipation	of	future	demand.
We	also	work	with	a	wide	variety	of	hospitality,	retail	and	public	destinations,	as	well	as	businesses	with	commuting	employees,	to	offer	additional
charging	options	for	our	customers,	as	well	as	single-family	homeowners	and	multi-family	residential	entities,	to	deploy	home	charging	solutions.
In-App	Upgrades
As	our	vehicles	are	capable	of	being	updated	remotely	over-the-air,	our	customers	may	purchase	additional	paid	options	and	features	through	the
Tesla	app	or	through	the	in-vehicle	user	interface.	We	expect	that	this	functionality	will	also	allow	us	to	offer	certain	options	and	features	on	a
subscription	basis	in	the	future.
Energy	Generation	and	Storage
We	market	and	sell	our	solar	and	energy	storage	products	to	residential,	commercial	and	industrial	customers	and	utilities	through	a	variety	of
channels,	including	through	our	website,	stores	and	galleries,	as	well	as	through	our	network	of	channel	partners,	and	in	the	case	of	some	commercial
customers,	through	PPA	transactions.	We	emphasize	simplicity,	standardization	and	accessibility	to	make	it	easy	and	cost-effective	for	customers	to	adopt
clean	energy,	while	reducing	our	customer	acquisition	costs.
Service	and	Warranty
Automotive
Service
We	provide	service	for	our	electric	vehicles	at	our	company-owned	service	locations	and	through	Tesla	Mobile	Service	technicians	who	perform	work
remotely	at	customers’	homes	or	other	locations.	Servicing	the	vehicles	ourselves	allows	us	to	identify	problems	and	implement	solutions	and
improvements	faster	than	traditional	automobile	manufacturers	and	their	dealer	networks.	The	connectivity	of	our	vehicles	also	allows	us	to	diagnose	and
remedy	many	problems	remotely	and	proactively.
Vehicle	Limited	Warranties	and	Extended	Service	Plans
We	provide	a	manufacturer’s	limited	warranty	on	all	new	and	used	Tesla	vehicles	we	sell	directly	to	consumers,	which	may	include	limited
warranties	on	certain	components,	specific	types	of	damage	or	battery	capacity	retention.	We	also	currently	offer	optional	extended	service	plans	that
provide	coverage	beyond	the	new	vehicle	limited	warranties	for	certain	models	in	specified	regions.
7Table	of	Contents
Energy	Generation	and	Storage
We	provide	service	and	repairs	to	our	energy	product	customers,	including	under	warranty	where	applicable.	We	generally	provide	manufacturer’s
limited	warranties	with	our	energy	storage	products	and	offer	certain	extended	limited	warranties	that	are	available	at	the	time	of	purchase	of	the
system.	If	we	install	a	system,	we	also	provide	certain	limited	warranties	on	our	installation	workmanship.
For	retrofit	solar	energy	systems,	we	provide	separate	limited	warranties	for	workmanship	and	against	roof	leaks,	and	for	Solar	Roof,	we	also
provide	limited	warranties	for	defects	and	weatherization.	For	components	not	manufactured	by	us,	we	generally	pass-through	the	applicable
manufacturers’	warranties.
As	part	of	our	solar	energy	system	and	energy	storage	contracts,	we	may	provide	the	customer	with	performance	guarantees	that	commit	that	the
underlying	system	will	meet	or	exceed	the	minimum	energy	generation	or	performance	requirements	specified	in	the	contract.
Financial	Services
Automotive
Purchase	Financing	and	Leases
We	offer	leasing	and/or	loan	financing	arrangements	for	our	vehicles	in	certain	jurisdictions	in	North	America,	Europe	and	Asia	ourselves	and
through	various	financial	institutions.	Under	certain	of	such	programs,	we	have	provided	resale	value	guarantees	or	buyback	guarantees	that	may
obligate	us	to	cover	a	resale	loss	up	to	a	certain	limit	or	repurchase	the	subject	vehicles	at	pre-determined	values.
Insurance
In	2021,	we	launched	our	insurance	product	using	real-time	driving	behavior	in	select	states,	which	offers	rates	that	are	often	better	than	other
alternatives	and	promotes	safer	driving.	Our	insurance	products	are	currently	available	in	12	states	and	we	plan	to	expand	the	markets	in	which	we	offer
insurance	products,	as	part	of	our	ongoing	effort	to	decrease	the	total	cost	of	ownership	for	our	customers.
Energy	Generation	and	Storage
We	offer	certain	financing	options	to	our	solar	customers,	which	enable	the	customer	to	purchase	and	own	a	solar	energy	system,	Solar	Roof	or
integrated	solar	and	Powerwall	system.	Our	solar	PPAs,	offered	primarily	to	commercial	customers,	charge	a	fee	per	kilowatt-hour	based	on	the	amount	of
electricity	produced	by	our	solar	energy	systems.
Manufacturing
We	currently	have	manufacturing	facilities	in	the	U.S.	in	Northern	California,	in	Buffalo,	New	York,	Gigafactory	New	York;	in	Austin,	Texas,
Gigafactory	Texas	and	near	Reno,	Nevada,	Gigafactory	Nevada.	At	these	facilities,	we	manufacture	and	assemble,	among	other	things,	vehicles,	certain
vehicle	parts	and	components,	such	as	our	battery	packs	and	battery	cells,	energy	storage	components	and	solar	products	and	components.
Internationally,	we	also	have	manufacturing	facilities	in	China	(Gigafactory	Shanghai)	and	Germany	(Gigafactory	Berlin-Brandenburg),	which	allows
us	to	increase	the	affordability	of	our	vehicles	for	customers	in	local	markets	by	reducing	transportation	and	manufacturing	costs	and	eliminating	the
impact	of	unfavorable	tariffs.	In	March	2023,	we	announced	the	location	of	our	next	Gigafactory	in	Monterrey,	Mexico.	Generally,	we	continue	to	expand
production	capacity	at	our	existing	facilities.	We	also	intend	to	further	increase	cost-competitiveness	in	our	significant	markets	by	strategically	adding
local	manufacturing.
Supply	Chain
Our	products	use	thousands	of	parts	that	are	sourced	from	hundreds	of	suppliers	across	the	world.	We	have	developed	close	relationships	with
vendors	of	key	parts	such	as	battery	cells,	electronics	and	complex	vehicle	assemblies.	Certain	components	purchased	from	these	suppliers	are	shared	or
are	similar	across	many	product	lines,	allowing	us	to	take	advantage	of	pricing	efficiencies	from	economies	of	scale.
8Table	of	Contents
As	is	the	case	for	some	automotive	companies,	some	of	our	procured	components	and	systems	are	sourced	from	single	suppliers.	Where	multiple
sources	are	available	for	certain	key	components,	we	work	to	qualify	multiple	suppliers	for	them	where	it	is	sensible	to	do	so	in	order	to	minimize
potential	production	risks	due	to	disruptions	in	their	supply.	We	also	mitigate	risk	by	maintaining	safety	stock	for	key	parts	and	assemblies	and	die	banks
for	components	with	lengthy	procurement	lead	times.
Our	products	use	various	raw	materials	including	aluminum,	steel,	cobalt,	lithium,	nickel	and	copper.	Pricing	for	these	materials	is	governed	by
market	conditions	and	may	fluctuate	due	to	various	factors	outside	of	our	control,	such	as	supply	and	demand	and	market	speculation.	We	strive	to
execute	long-term	supply	contracts	for	such	materials	at	competitive	pricing	when	feasible,	and	we	currently	believe	that	we	have	adequate	access	to
raw	materials	supplies	to	meet	the	needs	of	our	operations.
Governmental	Programs,	Incentives	and	Regulations
Globally,	the	ownership	of	our	products	by	our	customers	is	impacted	by	various	government	credits,	incentives,	and	policies.	Our	business	and
products	are	also	subject	to	numerous	governmental	regulations	that	vary	among	jurisdictions.
The	operation	of	our	business	is	also	impacted	by	various	government	programs,	incentives,	and	other	arrangements.	See	Note	2,	
Summary	of
Significant	Accounting	Policies
,	to	the	consolidated	financial	statements	included	elsewhere	in	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K	for	further	details.
Programs	and	Incentives
Inflation	Reduction	Act
On	August	16,	2022,	the	Inflation	Reduction	Act	of	2022	(“IRA”)	was	enacted	into	law	and	is	effective	for	taxable	years	beginning	after	December
31,	2022,	and	remains	subject	to	future	guidance	releases.	The	IRA	includes	multiple	incentives	to	promote	clean	energy,	electric	vehicles,	battery	and
energy	storage	manufacture	or	purchase,	including	through	providing	tax	credits	to	consumers.	For	example,	qualifying	Tesla	customers	may	receive	up
to	$7,500	in	federal	tax	credits	for	the	purchase	of	qualified	electric	vehicles	in	the	U.S.	through	2032.
Automotive	Regulatory	Credits
We	earn	tradable	credits	in	the	operation	of	our	business	under	various	regulations	related	to	zero-emission	vehicles	(“ZEVs”),	greenhouse	gas,	fuel
economy	and	clean	fuel.	We	sell	these	credits	to	other	regulated	entities	who	can	use	the	credits	to	comply	with	emission	standards	and	other	regulatory
requirements.	Sales	of	these	credits	are	recognized	within	automotive	regulatory	credits	revenue	in	our	consolidated	statements	of	operations	included
elsewhere	in	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K.
Energy	Storage	System	Incentives	and	Policies
While	the	regulatory	regime	for	energy	storage	projects	is	still	under	development,	there	are	various	policies,	incentives	and	financial	mechanisms
at	the	federal,	state	and	local	levels	that	support	the	adoption	of	energy	storage.
For	example,	energy	storage	systems	that	are	charged	using	solar	energy	may	be	eligible	for	the	solar	energy-related	U.S.	federal	tax	credits
described	below.	The	Federal	Energy	Regulatory	Commission	(“FERC”)	has	also	taken	steps	to	enable	the	participation	of	energy	storage	in	wholesale
energy	markets.	In	addition,	California	and	a	number	of	other	states	have	adopted	procurement	targets	for	energy	storage,	and	behind-the-meter	energy
storage	systems	qualify	for	funding	under	the	California	Self	Generation	Incentive	Program.	Our	customers	primarily	benefit	directly	under	these
programs.	In	certain	instances	our	customers	may	transfer	such	credits	to	us	as	contract	consideration.	In	such	transactions,	they	are	included	as	a
component	of	energy	generation	and	storage	revenues	in	our	consolidated	statements	of	operations	included	elsewhere	in	this	Annual	Report	on	Form
10-K.
Pursuant	to	the	IRA,	under	Sections	48,	48E	and	25D	of	the	Internal	Revenue	Code	(”IRC”),	standalone	energy	storage	technology	is	eligible	for	a	tax
credit	between	6%	and	50%	of	qualified	expenditures,	regardless	of	the	source	of	energy,	which	may	be	claimed	by	our	customers	for	storage	systems
they	purchase	or	by	us	for	arrangements	where	we	own	the	systems.	These	tax	credits	are	primarily	for	the	benefit	of	our	customers	and	are	currently
scheduled	to	phase-out	starting	in	2032	or	later.
9Table	of	Contents
Solar	Energy	System	Incentives	and	Policies
U.S.	federal,	state	and	local	governments	have	established	various	policies,	incentives	and	financial	mechanisms	to	reduce	the	cost	of	solar	energy
and	to	accelerate	the	adoption	of	solar	energy.	These	incentives	include	tax	credits,	cash	grants,	tax	abatements	and	rebates.
In	particular,	pursuant	to	the	IRA,	Sections	48,	48E	and	25D	of	the	IRC	provides	a	tax	credit	between	6%	and	70%	of	qualified	commercial	or
residential	expenditures	for	solar	energy	systems,	which	may	be	claimed	by	our	customers	for	systems	they	purchase,	or	by	us	for	arrangements	where
we	own	the	systems	for	properties	that	meet	statutory	requirements.	These	tax	credits	are	primarily	for	the	direct	benefit	of	our	customers	and	are
currently	scheduled	to	phase-out	starting	in	2032	or	later.
Regulations
Vehicle	Safety	and	Testing
In	the	U.S.,	our	vehicles	are	subject	to	regulation	by	the	National	Highway	Traffic	Safety	Administration	(“NHTSA”),	including	all	applicable	Federal
Motor	Vehicle	Safety	Standards	(“FMVSS”)	and	the	NHTSA	bumper	standard.	Numerous	FMVSS	apply	to	our	vehicles,	such	as	crash-worthiness	and
occupant	protection	requirements.	Our	current	vehicles	fully	comply	and	we	expect	that	our	vehicles	in	the	future	will	fully	comply	with	all	applicable
FMVSS	with	limited	or	no	exemptions,	however,	FMVSS	are	subject	to	change	from	time	to	time.	As	a	manufacturer,	we	must	self-certify	that	our	vehicles
meet	all	applicable	FMVSS	and	the	NHTSA	bumper	standard,	or	otherwise	are	exempt,	before	the	vehicles	may	be	imported	or	sold	in	the	U.S.
We	are	also	required	to	comply	with	other	federal	laws	administered	by	NHTSA,	including	the	Corporate	Average	Fuel	Economy	standards,	Theft
Prevention	Act	requirements,	labeling	requirements	and	other	information	provided	to	customers	in	writing,	Early	Warning	Reporting	requirements
regarding	warranty	claims,	field	reports,	death	and	injury	reports	and	foreign	recalls,	a	Standing	General	Order	requiring	reports	regarding	crashes
involving	vehicles	equipped	with	advanced	driver	assistance	systems,	and	additional	requirements	for	cooperating	with	compliance	and	safety
investigations	and	recall	reporting.	The	U.S.	Automobile	Information	and	Disclosure	Act	also	requires	manufacturers	of	motor	vehicles	to	disclose	certain
information	regarding	the	manufacturer’s	suggested	retail	price,	optional	equipment	and	pricing.	In	addition,	federal	law	requires	inclusion	of	fuel
economy	ratings,	as	determined	by	the	U.S.	Department	of	Transportation	and	the	Environmental	Protection	Agency	(the	“EPA”),	and	New	Car
Assessment	Program	ratings	as	determined	by	NHTSA,	if	available.
Our	vehicles	sold	outside	of	the	U.S.	are	subject	to	similar	foreign	compliance,	safety,	environmental	and	other	regulations.	Many	of	those
regulations	are	different	from	those	applicable	in	the	U.S.	and	may	require	redesign	and/or	retesting.	Some	of	those	regulations	impact	or	prevent	the
rollout	of	new	vehicle	features.
Self-Driving	Vehicles
Generally,	laws	pertaining	to	self-driving	vehicles	are	evolving	globally,	and	in	some	cases	may	create	restrictions	on	features	or	vehicle	designs
that	we	develop.	While	there	are	currently	no	federal	U.S.	regulations	pertaining	specifically	to	self-driving	vehicles	or	self-driving	equipment,	NHTSA	has
published	recommended	guidelines	on	self-driving	vehicles,	apart	from	the	FMVSS	and	manufacturer	reporting	obligations,	and	retains	the	authority	to
investigate	and/or	take	action	on	the	safety	or	compliance	of	any	vehicle,	equipment	or	features	operating	on	public	roads.	Certain	U.S.	states	also	have
legal	restrictions	on	the	operation,	registration	or	licensure	of	self-driving	vehicles,	and	many	other	states	are	considering	them.	This	regulatory
patchwork	increases	the	legal	complexity	with	respect	to	self-driving	vehicles	in	the	U.S.
In	markets	that	follow	the	regulations	of	the	United	Nations	Economic	Commission	for	Europe	(“
ECE	markets
”),	some	requirements	restrict	the
design	of	advanced	driver-assistance	or	self-driving	features,	which	can	compromise	or	prevent	their	use	entirely.	Other	applicable	laws,	both	current	and
proposed,	may	hinder	the	path	and	timeline	to	introducing	self-driving	vehicles	for	sale	and	use	in	the	markets	where	they	apply.
Other	key	markets,	including	China,	continue	to	consider	self-driving	regulation.	Any	implemented	regulations	may	differ	materially	from	the	U.S.
and	ECE	markets,	which	may	further	increase	the	legal	complexity	of	self-driving	vehicles	and	limit	or	prevent	certain	features.
10Table	of	Contents
Automobile	Manufacturer	and	Dealer	Regulation
In	the	U.S.,	state	laws	regulate	the	manufacture,	distribution,	sale	and	service	of	automobiles,	and	generally	require	motor	vehicle	manufacturers
and	dealers	to	be	licensed	in	order	to	sell	vehicles	directly	to	residents.	Certain	states	have	asserted	that	the	laws	in	such	states	do	not	permit	automobile
manufacturers	to	be	licensed	as	dealers	or	to	act	in	the	capacity	of	a	dealer,	or	that	they	otherwise	restrict	a	manufacturer’s	ability	to	deliver	or	perform
warranty	repairs	on	vehicles.	To	sell	vehicles	to	residents	of	states	where	we	are	not	licensed	as	a	dealer,	we	generally	conduct	the	sale	out	of	the	state.
In	certain	such	states,	we	have	opened	“galleries”	that	serve	an	educational	purpose	and	where	sales	may	not	occur.
Some	automobile	dealer	trade	associations	have	both	challenged	the	legality	of	our	operations	in	court	and	used	administrative	and	legislative
processes	to	attempt	to	prohibit	or	limit	our	ability	to	operate	existing	stores	or	expand	to	new	locations.	Certain	dealer	associations	have	also	actively
lobbied	state	licensing	agencies	and	legislators	to	interpret	existing	laws	or	enact	new	laws	in	ways	not	favorable	to	our	ownership	and	operation	of	our
own	retail	and	service	locations.	We	expect	such	challenges	to	continue,	and	we	intend	to	actively	fight	any	such	efforts.
Battery	Safety	and	Testing
Our	battery	packs	are	subject	to	various	U.S.	and	international	regulations	that	govern	transport	of	“dangerous	goods,”	defined	to	include	lithium-
ion	batteries,	which	may	present	a	risk	in	transportation.	We	conduct	testing	to	demonstrate	our	compliance	with	such	regulations.
We	use	lithium-ion	cells	in	our	high	voltage	battery	packs	in	our	vehicles	and	energy	storage	products.	The	use,	storage	and	disposal	of	our	battery
packs	are	regulated	under	existing	laws	and	are	the	subject	of	ongoing	regulatory	changes	that	may	add	additional	requirements	in	the	future.	We	have
agreements	with	third	party	battery	recycling	companies	to	recycle	our	battery	packs,	and	we	are	also	piloting	our	own	recycling	technology.
Solar	Energy—General
We	are	subject	to	certain	state	and	federal	regulations	applicable	to	solar	and	battery	storage	providers	and	sellers	of	electricity.	To	operate	our
systems,	we	enter	into	standard	interconnection	agreements	with	applicable	utilities.	Sales	of	electricity	and	non-sale	equipment	leases	by	third	parties,
such	as	our	leases	and	PPAs,	have	faced	regulatory	challenges	in	some	states	and	jurisdictions.
Solar	Energy—Net	Metering
Most	states	in	the	U.S.	make	net	energy	metering,	or	net	metering,	available	to	solar	customers.	Net	metering	typically	allows	solar	customers	to
interconnect	their	solar	energy	systems	to	the	utility	grid	and	offset	their	utility	electricity	purchases	by	receiving	a	bill	credit	for	excess	energy	generated
by	their	solar	energy	system	that	is	exported	to	the	grid.	In	certain	jurisdictions,	regulators	or	utilities	have	reduced	or	eliminated	the	benefit	available
under	net	metering	or	have	proposed	to	do	so.
Competition
Automotive
The	worldwide	automotive	market	is	highly	competitive	and	we	expect	it	will	become	even	more	competitive	in	the	future	as	a	significant	and
growing	number	of	established	and	new	automobile	manufacturers,	as	well	as	other	companies,	have	entered,	or	are	reported	to	have	plans	to	enter	the
electric	vehicle	market.
We	believe	that	our	vehicles	compete	in	the	market	based	on	both	their	traditional	segment	classification	as	well	as	their	propulsion	technology.	For
example,	Cybertruck	competes	with	other	pickup	trucks,	Model	S	and	Model	X	compete	primarily	with	premium	sedans	and	premium	SUVs	and	Model	3
and	Model	Y	compete	with	small	to	medium-sized	sedans	and	compact	SUVs,	which	are	extremely	competitive	markets.	Competing	products	typically
include	internal	combustion	vehicles	from	more	established	automobile	manufacturers;	however,	many	established	and	new	automobile	manufacturers
have	entered	or	have	announced	plans	to	enter	the	market	for	electric	and	other	alternative	fuel	vehicles.	Overall,	we	believe	these	announcements	and
vehicle	introductions,	including	the	introduction	of	electric	vehicles	into	rental	car	company	fleets,	promote	the	development	of	the	electric	vehicle
market	by	highlighting	the	attractiveness	of	electric	vehicles	relative	to	the	internal	combustion	vehicle.	Many	major	automobile	manufacturers	have
electric	vehicles	available	today	in	major	markets	including	the	U.S.,	China	and	Europe,	and	other	current	and	prospective	automobile	manufacturers	are
also	developing	electric	vehicles.	In	addition,	several	manufacturers	offer	hybrid	vehicles,	including	plug-in	versions.
11Table	of	Contents
We	believe	that	there	is	also	increasing	competition	for	our	vehicle	offerings	as	a	platform	for	delivering	self-driving	technologies,	charging	solutions
and	other	features	and	services,	and	we	expect	to	compete	in	this	developing	market	through	continued	progress	on	our	Autopilot,	FSD	and	neural
network	capabilities,	Supercharger	network	and	our	infotainment	offerings.
Energy	Generation	and	Storage
Energy	Storage	Systems
The	market	for	energy	storage	products	is	also	highly	competitive,	and	both	established	and	emerging	companies	have	introduced	products	that	are
similar	to	our	product	portfolio	or	that	are	alternatives	to	the	elements	of	our	systems.	We	compete	with	these	companies	based	on	price,	energy	density
and	efficiency.	We	believe	that	the	specifications	and	features	of	our	products,	our	strong	brand	and	the	modular,	scalable	nature	of	our	energy	storage
products	give	us	a	competitive	advantage	in	our	markets.
Solar	Energy	Systems
The	primary	competitors	to	our	solar	energy	business	are	the	traditional	local	utility	companies	that	supply	energy	to	our	potential	customers.	We
compete	with	these	traditional	utility	companies	primarily	based	on	price	and	the	ease	by	which	customers	can	switch	to	electricity	generated	by	our
solar	energy	systems.	We	also	compete	with	solar	energy	companies	that	provide	products	and	services	similar	to	ours.	Many	solar	energy	companies
only	install	solar	energy	systems,	while	others	only	provide	financing	for	these	installations.	We	believe	we	have	a	significant	expansion	opportunity	with
our	offerings	and	that	the	regulatory	environment	is	increasingly	conducive	to	the	adoption	of	renewable	energy	systems.
Intellectual	Property
We	place	a	strong	emphasis	on	our	innovative	approach	and	proprietary	designs	which	bring	intrinsic	value	and	uniqueness	to	our	product	portfolio.
As	part	of	our	business,	we	seek	to	protect	the	underlying	intellectual	property	rights	of	these	innovations	and	designs	such	as	with	respect	to	patents,
trademarks,	copyrights,	trade	secrets,	confidential	information	and	other	measures,	including	through	employee	and	third-party	nondisclosure
agreements	and	other	contractual	arrangements.	For	example,	we	place	a	high	priority	on	obtaining	patents	to	provide	the	broadest	and	strongest
possible	protection	to	enable	our	freedom	to	operate	our	innovations	and	designs	across	all	of	our	products	and	technologies	as	well	as	to	protect	and
defend	our	product	portfolio.	We	have	also	adopted	a	patent	policy	in	which	we	irrevocably	pledged	that	we	will	not	initiate	a	lawsuit	against	any	party	for
infringing	our	patents	through	activity	relating	to	electric	vehicles	or	related	equipment	for	so	long	as	such	party	is	acting	in	good	faith.	We	made	this
pledge	in	order	to	encourage	the	advancement	of	a	common,	rapidly-evolving	platform	for	electric	vehicles,	thereby	benefiting	ourselves,	other
companies	making	electric	vehicles	and	the	world.
Environmental,	Social	and	Governance	(ESG)	and	Human	Capital	Resources
ESG
The	very	purpose	of	Tesla's	existence	is	to	accelerate	the	world's	transition	to	sustainable	energy.	We	believe	the	world	cannot	reduce	carbon
emissions	without	addressing	both	energy	generation	and	consumption,	and	we	are	designing	and	manufacturing	a	complete	energy	and	transportation
ecosystem	to	achieve	this	goal.	As	we	expand,	we	are	building	each	new	factory	to	be	more	efficient	and	sustainably	designed	than	the	previous	one,
including	with	respect	to	per-unit	waste	reduction	and	resource	consumption,	including	water	and	energy	usage.	We	are	focused	on	further	enhancing
sustainability	of	operations	outside	of	our	direct	control,	including	reducing	the	carbon	footprint	of	our	supply	chain.
We	are	committed	to	sourcing	only	responsibly	produced	materials,	and	our	suppliers	are	required	to	provide	evidence	of	management	systems	that
ensure	social,	environmental	and	sustainability	best	practices	in	their	own	operations,	as	well	as	to	demonstrate	a	commitment	to	responsible	sourcing
into	their	supply	chains.	We	have	a	zero-tolerance	policy	when	it	comes	to	child	or	forced	labor	and	human	trafficking	by	our	suppliers	and	we	look	to	the
Organization	for	Economic	Co-operation	and	Development	Due	Diligence	Guidelines	to	inform	our	process	and	use	feedback	from	our	internal	and
external	stakeholders	to	find	ways	to	continually	improve.	We	are	also	driving	safety	in	our	own	factories	by	focusing	on	worker	engagement.	Our
incidents	per	vehicle	continue	to	drop	even	as	our	production	volumes	increase.	We	also	strive	to	be	an	employer	of	choice	by	offering	compelling,
impactful	jobs	with	best	in-industry	benefits.
12Table	of	Contents
We	believe	that	sound	corporate	governance	is	critical	to	helping	us	achieve	our	goals,	including	with	respect	to	ESG.	We	continue	to	evolve	a
governance	framework	that	exercises	appropriate	oversight	of	responsibilities	at	all	levels	throughout	the	company	and	manages	its	affairs	consistent
with	high	principles	of	business	ethics.	Our	ESG	Sustainability	Council	is	made	up	of	leaders	from	across	our	company,	and	regularly	presents	to	our	Board
of	Directors,	which	oversees	our	ESG	impacts,	initiatives	and	priorities.
Human	Capital	Resources
A	competitive	edge	for	Tesla	is	its	ability	to	attract	and	retain	high	quality	employees.	During	the	past	year,	Tesla	made	substantial	investments	in
its	workforce,	further	strengthening	its	standing	as	one	of	the	most	desirable	and	innovative	companies	to	work	for.	As	of	December	31,	2023,	our
employee	headcount	worldwide	was	140,473.
We	have	created	an	environment	that	fosters	growth	opportunities,	and	as	of	this	report,	nearly	two-thirds	(65%)	of	our	managers	were	promoted
from	an	internal,	non-manager	position,	and	43%	of	our	management	employees	have	been	with	Tesla	for	more	than	five	years.	Tesla’s	growth	of	35%
over	the	past	two	years	has	offered	internal	career	development	to	our	employees	as	well	as	the	ability	to	make	a	meaningful	contribution	to	a
sustainable	future.
We	are	able	to	retain	our	employees,	in	part,	not	only	because	employees	can	enjoy	ownership	in	Tesla	through	stock	(of	which	89%	have	been
given	the	opportunity	to),	but	because	we	also	provide	them	with	excellent	health	benefits	such	as	free	counseling,	paid	parental	leave,	paid	time	off	and
zero-premium	medical	plan	options	that	are	made	available	on	the	first	day	of	employment.
We	recognize	the	positive	impact	that	leaders	can	have	on	their	teams	and	offer	fundamental	skills	training	and	continuous	development	to	all
leaders	through	various	programs	globally.
We	don’t	stop	there.	Tesla	has	several	other	programs	strategically	designed	to	increase	paths	for	greater	career	opportunity	such	as:
•
Technician	Trainee	(Service)	
–
 
The	Tesla	Technician	Trainee	Program	provides	on-the-job	automotive	maintenance	training	at	Tesla,
resulting	in	an	industry	certification.	Targeted	at	individuals	with	limited	experience,	whether	in	industry	or	vocational	schools,	the	program
prepares	trainees	for	employment	as	technicians.	In	2023,	we	hired	over	1,900	Technician	Trainees	across	the	U.S.,	Germany	and	China.
•
START	(Manufacturing	and	Service)	
–	Tesla	START	is	an	intensive	training	program	that	complements	the	Technician	Trainee	program	and
equips	individuals	with	the	skills	needed	for	a	successful	technician	role	at	Tesla.	We	have	partnered	with	colleges	and	technical	academies	to
launch	Tesla	START	in	the	U.S.,	United	Kingdom	and	Germany.	In	2023,	we	hired	over	350	trainees	for	manufacturing	and	service	roles	through
this	program,	providing	an	opportunity	to	transition	into	full-time	employment
.
•
Internships	
–	Annually,	Tesla	hires	over	6,000	university	and	college	students	from	around	the	world.	We	recruit	from	diverse	student
organizations	and	campuses,	seeking	top	talent	passionate	about	our	mission.	Our	interns	engage	in	meaningful	work	from	day	one,	and	we
often	offer	them	full-time	positions	post-internship.
•
Military	Fellowship	and	Transition	Programs	–
 The	Military	Fellowship	and	Transition	Programs	are	designed	to	offer	exiting	military	service
members	in	the	U.S.	and	Europe	with	career	guidance	on	transitioning	into	the	civil	workforce.	We	partner	with	the	career	transition	services	of
European	Defence	Ministries	across	five	countries,	as	well	as	the	U.S.	Chamber	of	Commerce’s	Hire	our	Heroes.	These	programs	aim	to	convert
high-performing	individuals	to	full-time	roles	and	create	a	veteran	talent	pipeline.
•
Apprenticeships
	–	Tesla	Apprenticeships	are	offered	globally,	providing	academic	and	on-the-job	training	to	prepare	specialists	in	skilled
trades.	Apprentices	will	complete	between	one	to	four	years	of	on-the-job	training.	Apprentice	programs	have	seen	skilled	trade	hires	across	the
U.S.,	Australia,	Hong	Kong,	Korea	and	Germany.
•
Manufacturing	Development	Program	
– Tesla's	manufacturing	pathway	program	is	designed	to	provide	graduating	high	school	seniors	with
the	financial	resources,	coursework	and	experience	they	need	to	start	a	successful	manufacturing	career	at	Tesla.	We	hired	373	graduates
through	this	program	in	2023,	and	our	goal	in	2024	is	grow	this	program	to	over	600	students	annually	across	our	Fremont	Factory,	Gigafactory
Nevada,	Gigafactory	Texas	and	Gigafactory	New	York.
13Table	of	Contents
•
Engineering	Development	Program	
– Launched	in	January	2024,	this	program	targets	recent	college	and	university	graduates	for	specialized
engineering	fields.	In	collaboration	with	Austin	Community	College,	the	program	educates	early-career	engineers	in	controls	engineering,
enhancing	their	knowledge	of	high-demand	technologies	for	U.S.	manufacturing.
We	will	continue	to	expand	the	opportunities	for	our	employees	to	add	skills	and	develop	professionally	with	a	new	Employee	Educational	Assistance
Program	launching	in	the	U.S.	in	the	spring	of	2024	to	help	employees	pursue	select	certificates	or	degrees.	With	virtual,	self-paced	education	options
available,	employees	can	pursue	a	new	path	or	expand	their	knowledge	while	continuing	to	grow	their	career.
At	Tesla,	our	employees	show	up	passionate	about	making	a	difference	in	the	world	and	for	each	other.	We	remain	unwavering	in	our	demand	that
our	factories,	offices,	stores	and	service	centers	are	places	where	our	employees	feel	respected	and	appreciated.	Our	policies	are	designed	to	promote
fairness	and	respect	for	everyone.	We	hire,	evaluate	and	promote	employees	based	on	their	skills	and	performance.	Everyone	is	expected	to	be
trustworthy,	demonstrate	excellence	in	their	performance	and	collaborate	with	others.	With	this	in	mind,	we	will	not	tolerate	certain	behaviors.	These
include	harassment,	retaliation,	violence,	intimidation	and	discrimination	of	any	kind	on	the	basis	of	race,	color,	religion,	national	origin,	gender,	sexual
orientation,	gender	identity,	gender	expression,	age,	disability	or	veteran	status.
Anti-harassment	training	is	conducted	on	day	one	of	new	hire	orientation	for	all	employees	and	reoccurring	for	leaders.	In	addition,	we	run	various
leadership	development	programs	throughout	the	year	aimed	at	enhancing	leaders’	skills,	and	in	particular,	helping	them	to	understand	how	to
appropriately	respond	to	and	address	employee	concerns.
Employees	are	encouraged	to	speak	up	both	in	regard	to	misconduct	and	safety	concerns	and	can	do	so	by	contacting	the	integrity	line,	submitting
concerns	through	our	Take	Charge	process,	or	notifying	their	Human	Resource	Partner	or	any	member	of	management.	Concerns	are	reviewed	in
accordance	with	established	protocols	by	investigators	with	expertise,	who	also	review	for	trends	and	outcomes	for	remediation	and	appropriate	controls.
Responding	to	questions	timely	is	key	so	Human	Resource	Partners	for	each	functional	area	are	visible	throughout	facilities	and	are	actively	involved	in
driving	culture	and	engagement	alongside	business	leaders.
Available	Information
We	file	or	furnish	periodic	reports	and	amendments	thereto,	including	our	Annual	Reports	on	Form	10-K,	our	Quarterly	Reports	on	Form	10-Q	and
Current	Reports	on	Form	8-K,	proxy	statements	and	other	information	with	the	SEC.	In	addition,	the	SEC	maintains	a	website	(
www.sec.gov
)	that	contains
reports,	proxy	and	information	statements,	and	other	information	regarding	issuers	that	file	electronically.	Our	website	is	located	at	
www.tesla.com
,	and
our	reports,	amendments	thereto,	proxy	statements	and	other	information	are	also	made	available,	free	of	charge,	on	our	investor	relations	website	at
ir.tesla.com
	as	soon	as	reasonably	practicable	after	we	electronically	file	or	furnish	such	information	with	the	SEC.	The	information	posted	on	our	website
is	not	incorporated	by	reference	into	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K.
ITEM	1A.	RISK	FACTORS
You	should	carefully	consider	the	risks	described	below	together	with	the	other	information	set	forth	in	this	report,	which	could	materially	affect	our
business,	financial	condition	and	future	results.	The	risks	described	below	are	not	the	only	risks	facing	our	company.	Risks	and	uncertainties	not	currently
known	to	us	or	that	we	currently	deem	to	be	immaterial	also	may	materially	adversely	affect	our	business,	financial	condition	and	operating	results.
Risks	Related	to	Our	Ability	to	Grow	Our	Business
We	may	experience	delays	in	launching	and	ramping	the	production	of	our	products	and	features,	or	we	may	be	unable	to	control
our	manufacturing	costs.
We	have	previously	experienced	and	may	in	the	future	experience	launch	and	production	ramp	delays	for	new	products	and	features.	For	example,
we	encountered	unanticipated	supplier	issues	that	led	to	delays	during	the	initial	ramp	of	our	first	Model	X	and	experienced	challenges	with	a	supplier	and
with	ramping	full	automation	for	certain	of	our	initial	Model	3	manufacturing	processes.	In	addition,	we	may	introduce	in	the	future	new	or	unique
manufacturing	processes	and	design	features	for	our	products.	As	we	expand	our	vehicle	offerings	and	global	footprint,	there	is	no	guarantee	that	we	will
be	able	to	successfully	and	timely	introduce	and	scale	such	processes	or	features.
14Table	of	Contents
In	particular,	our	future	business	depends	in	large	part	on	increasing	the	production	of	mass-market	vehicles.	In	order	to	be	successful,	we	will	need
to	implement,	maintain	and	ramp	efficient	and	cost-effective	manufacturing	capabilities,	processes	and	supply	chains	and	achieve	the	design	tolerances,
high	quality	and	output	rates	we	have	planned	at	our	manufacturing	facilities	in	California,	Nevada,	Texas,	China,	Germany	and	any	future	sites	such	as
Mexico.	We	will	also	need	to	hire,	train	and	compensate	skilled	employees	to	operate	these	facilities.	Bottlenecks	and	other	unexpected	challenges	such
as	those	we	experienced	in	the	past	may	arise	during	our	production	ramps,	and	we	must	address	them	promptly	while	continuing	to	improve
manufacturing	processes	and	reducing	costs.	If	we	are	not	successful	in	achieving	these	goals,	we	could	face	delays	in	establishing	and/or	sustaining	our
product	ramps	or	be	unable	to	meet	our	related	cost	and	profitability	targets.
We	have	experienced,	and	may	also	experience	similar	future	delays	in	launching	and/or	ramping	production	of	our	energy	storage	products	and
Solar	Roof;	new	product	versions	or	variants;	new	vehicles;	and	future	features	and	services	based	on	artificial	intelligence.	Likewise,	we	may	encounter
delays	with	the	design,	construction	and	regulatory	or	other	approvals	necessary	to	build	and	bring	online	future	manufacturing	facilities	and	products.
Any	delay	or	other	complication	in	ramping	the	production	of	our	current	products	or	the	development,	manufacture,	launch	and	production	ramp	of
our	future	products,	features	and	services,	or	in	doing	so	cost-effectively	and	with	high	quality,	may	harm	our	brand,	business,	prospects,	financial
condition	and	operating	results.
Our	suppliers	may	fail	to	deliver	components	according	to	schedules,	prices,	quality	and	volumes	that	are	acceptable	to	us,	or	we
may	be	unable	to	manage	these	components	effectively.
Our	products	contain	thousands	of	parts	purchased	globally	from	hundreds	of	suppliers,	including	single-source	direct	suppliers,	which	exposes	us	to
multiple	potential	sources	of	component	shortages.	Unexpected	changes	in	business	conditions,	materials	pricing,	including	inflation	of	raw	material
costs,	labor	issues,	wars,	trade	policies,	natural	disasters,	health	epidemics	such	as	the	global	COVID-19	pandemic,	trade	and	shipping	disruptions,	port
congestions,	cyberattacks	and	other	factors	beyond	our	or	our	suppliers’	control	could	also	affect	these	suppliers’	ability	to	deliver	components	to	us	or	to
remain	solvent	and	operational.	For	example,	a	global	shortage	of	semiconductors	beginning	in	early	2021	has	caused	challenges	in	the	manufacturing
industry	and	impacted	our	supply	chain	and	production.	Additionally,	if	our	suppliers	do	not	accurately	forecast	and	effectively	allocate	production	or	if
they	are	not	willing	to	allocate	sufficient	production	to	us,	or	face	other	challenges	such	as	insolvency,	it	may	reduce	our	access	to	components	and
require	us	to	search	for	new	suppliers.	The	unavailability	of	any	component	or	supplier	could	result	in	production	delays,	idle	manufacturing	facilities,
product	design	changes	and	loss	of	access	to	important	technology	and	tools	for	producing	and	supporting	our	products,	as	well	as	impact	our	capacity
expansion	and	our	ability	to	fulfill	our	obligations	under	customer	contracts.	Moreover,	significant	increases	in	our	production	or	product	design	changes
by	us	have	required	and	may	in	the	future	require	us	to	procure	additional	components	in	a	short	amount	of	time.	We	have	faced	in	the	past,	and	may
face	suppliers	who	are	unwilling	or	unable	to	sustainably	meet	our	timelines	or	our	cost,	quality	and	volume	needs,	which	may	increase	our	costs	or
require	us	to	replace	them	with	other	sources.	Finally,	as	we	construct	new	manufacturing	facilities	and	add	production	lines	to	existing	facilities,	we	may
experience	issues	in	correspondingly	increasing	the	level	of	localized	procurement	at	those	facilities.	While	we	believe	that	we	will	be	able	to	secure
additional	or	alternate	sources	or	develop	our	own	replacements	for	most	of	our	components,	there	is	no	assurance	that	we	will	be	able	to	do	so	quickly
or	at	all.	Additionally,	we	may	be	unsuccessful	in	our	continuous	efforts	to	negotiate	with	existing	suppliers	to	obtain	cost	reductions	and	avoid
unfavorable	changes	to	terms,	source	less	expensive	suppliers	for	certain	parts	and	redesign	certain	parts	to	make	them	less	expensive	to	produce,
especially	in	the	case	of	increases	in	materials	pricing.	Any	of	these	occurrences	may	harm	our	business,	prospects,	financial	condition	and	operating
results.
As	the	scale	of	our	vehicle	production	increases,	we	will	also	need	to	accurately	forecast,	purchase,	warehouse	and	transport	components	at	high
volumes	to	our	manufacturing	facilities	and	servicing	locations	internationally.	If	we	are	unable	to	accurately	match	the	timing	and	quantities	of
component	purchases	to	our	actual	needs	or	successfully	implement	automation,	inventory	management	and	other	systems	to	accommodate	the
increased	complexity	in	our	supply	chain	and	parts	management,	we	may	incur	unexpected	production	disruption,	storage,	transportation	and	write-off
costs,	which	may	harm	our	business	and	operating	results.
We	may	be	unable	to	meet	our	projected	construction	timelines,	costs	and	production	ramps	at	new	factories,	or	we	may
experience	difficulties	in	generating	and	maintaining	demand	for	products	manufactured	there.
Our	ability	to	increase	production	of	our	vehicles	on	a	sustained	basis,	make	them	affordable	globally	by	accessing	local	supply	chains	and
workforces	and	streamline	delivery	logistics	is	dependent	on	the	construction	and	ramp	of	our	current	and	future	factories.	The	construction	of	and
commencement	and	ramp	of	production	at	these	factories	are	subject
15Table	of	Contents
to	a	number	of	uncertainties	inherent	in	all	new	manufacturing	operations,	including	ongoing	compliance	with	regulatory	requirements,	procurement	and
maintenance	of	construction,	environmental	and	operational	licenses	and	approvals	for	additional	expansion,	supply	chain	constraints,	hiring,	training	and
retention	of	qualified	employees	and	the	pace	of	bringing	production	equipment	and	processes	online	with	the	capability	to	manufacture	high-quality
units	at	scale.	Moreover,	we	will	have	to	establish	and	ramp	production	of	our	proprietary	battery	cells	and	packs	at	our	new	factories,	and	we	additionally
intend	to	incorporate	sequential	design	and	manufacturing	changes	into	vehicles	manufactured	at	each	new	factory.	If	we	experience	any	issues	or	delays
in	meeting	our	projected	timelines,	costs,	capital	efficiency	and	production	capacity	for	our	new	factories,	expanding	and	managing	teams	to	implement
iterative	design	and	production	changes	there,	maintaining	and	complying	with	the	terms	of	any	debt	financing	that	we	obtain	to	fund	them	or	generating
and	maintaining	demand	for	the	vehicles	we	manufacture	there,	our	business,	prospects,	operating	results	and	financial	condition	may	be	harmed.
We	may	be	unable	to	grow	our	global	product	sales,	delivery	and	installation	capabilities	and	our	servicing	and	vehicle	charging
networks,	or	we	may	be	unable	to	accurately	project	and	effectively	manage	our	growth.
Our	success	will	depend	on	our	ability	to	continue	to	expand	our	sales	capabilities.	We	are	targeting	a	global	mass	demographic	with	a	broad	range
of	potential	customers,	in	which	we	have	relatively	limited	experience	projecting	demand	and	pricing	our	products.	We	currently	produce	numerous
international	variants	at	a	limited	number	of	factories,	and	if	our	specific	demand	expectations	for	these	variants	prove	inaccurate,	we	may	not	be	able	to
timely	generate	deliveries	matched	to	the	vehicles	that	we	produce	in	the	same	timeframe	or	that	are	commensurate	with	the	size	of	our	operations	in	a
given	region.	Likewise,	as	we	develop	and	grow	our	energy	products	and	services	worldwide,	our	success	will	depend	on	our	ability	to	correctly	forecast
demand	in	various	markets.
Because	we	do	not	have	independent	dealer	networks,	we	are	responsible	for	delivering	all	of	our	vehicles	to	our	customers.	As	our	production
volumes	continue	to	grow,	we	have	faced	in	the	past,	and	may	face	challenges	with	deliveries	at	increasing	volumes,	particularly	in	international	markets
requiring	significant	transit	times.	We	have	also	deployed	a	number	of	delivery	models,	such	as	deliveries	to	customers’	homes	and	workplaces	and
touchless	deliveries,	but	there	is	no	guarantee	that	such	models	will	be	scalable	or	be	accepted	globally.	Likewise,	as	we	ramp	our	energy	products,	we
are	working	to	substantially	increase	our	production	and	installation	capabilities.	If	we	experience	production	delays	or	inaccurately	forecast	demand,	our
business,	financial	condition	and	operating	results	may	be	harmed.
Moreover,	because	of	our	unique	expertise	with	our	vehicles,	we	recommend	that	our	vehicles	be	serviced	by	us	or	by	certain	authorized
professionals.	If	we	experience	delays	in	adding	servicing	capacity	or	servicing	our	vehicles	efficiently,	or	experience	unforeseen	issues	with	the	reliability
of	our	vehicles,	particularly	higher-volume	additions	to	our	fleet	such	as	Model	3	and	Model	Y,	it	could	overburden	our	servicing	capabilities	and	parts
inventory.	Similarly,	the	increasing	number	of	Tesla	vehicles	also	requires	us	to	continue	to	rapidly	increase	the	number	of	our	Supercharger	stations	and
connectors	throughout	the	world.
There	is	no	assurance	that	we	will	be	able	to	ramp	our	business	to	meet	our	sales,	delivery,	installation,	servicing	and	vehicle	charging	targets
globally,	that	our	projections	on	which	such	targets	are	based	will	prove	accurate	or	that	the	pace	of	growth	or	coverage	of	our	customer	infrastructure
network	will	meet	customer	expectations.	These	plans	require	significant	cash	investments	and	management	resources	and	there	is	no	guarantee	that
they	will	generate	additional	sales	or	installations	of	our	products,	or	that	we	will	be	able	to	avoid	cost	overruns	or	be	able	to	hire	additional	personnel	to
support	them.	As	we	expand,	we	will	also	need	to	ensure	our	compliance	with	regulatory	requirements	in	various	jurisdictions	applicable	to	the	sale,
installation	and	servicing	of	our	products,	the	sale	or	dispatch	of	electricity	related	to	our	energy	products	and	the	operation	of	Superchargers.	If	we	fail	to
manage	our	growth	effectively,	it	may	harm	our	brand,	business,	prospects,	financial	condition	and	operating	results.
We	will	need	to	maintain	and	significantly	grow	our	access	to	battery	cells,	including	through	the	development	and	manufacture	of
our	own	cells,	and	control	our	related	costs.
We	are	dependent	on	the	continued	supply	of	lithium-ion	battery	cells	for	our	vehicles	and	energy	storage	products,	and	we	will	require	substantially
more	cells	to	grow	our	business	according	to	our	plans.	Currently,	we	rely	on	suppliers	such	as	Panasonic	and	Contemporary	Amperex	Technology	Co.
Limited	(CATL)	for	these	cells.	We	have	to	date	fully	qualified	only	a	very	limited	number	of	such	suppliers	and	have	limited	flexibility	in	changing
suppliers.	Any	disruption	in	the	supply	of	battery	cells	from	our	suppliers	could	limit	production	of	our	vehicles	and	energy	storage	products.	In	the	long
term,	we	intend	to	supplement	cells	from	our	suppliers	with	cells	manufactured	by	us,	which	we	believe	will	be	more	efficient,	manufacturable	at	greater
volumes	and	more	cost-effective	than	currently	available	cells.	However,	our	efforts	to	develop	and	manufacture	such	battery	cells	have	required,	and
may	continue	to	require,	significant	investments,	and	there	can	be	no	assurance	that	we	will	be	able	to	achieve	these	targets	in	the	timeframes	that	we
have	planned	or	at	all.	If	we	are
16Table	of	Contents
unable	to	do	so,	we	may	have	to	curtail	our	planned	vehicle	and	energy	storage	product	production	or	procure	additional	cells	from	suppliers	at
potentially	greater	costs,	either	of	which	may	harm	our	business	and	operating	results.
In	addition,	the	cost	and	mass	production	of	battery	cells,	whether	manufactured	by	our	suppliers	or	by	us,	depends	in	part	upon	the	prices	and
availability	of	raw	materials	such	as	lithium,	nickel,	cobalt	and/or	other	metals.	The	prices	for	these	materials	fluctuate	and	their	available	supply	may	be
unstable,	depending	on	market	conditions	and	global	demand	for	these	materials.	For	example,	as	a	result	of	increased	global	production	of	electric
vehicles	and	energy	storage	products,	suppliers	of	these	raw	materials	may	be	unable	to	meet	our	volume	needs.	Additionally,	our	suppliers	may	not	be
willing	or	able	to	reliably	meet	our	timelines	or	our	cost	and	quality	needs,	which	may	require	us	to	replace	them	with	other	sources.	Any	reduced
availability	of	these	materials	may	impact	our	access	to	cells	and	our	growth,	and	any	increases	in	their	prices	may	reduce	our	profitability	if	we	cannot
recoup	such	costs	through	increased	prices.	Moreover,	our	inability	to	meet	demand	and	any	product	price	increases	may	harm	our	brand,	growth,
prospects	and	operating	results.
Our	future	growth	and	success	are	dependent	upon	consumers’	demand	for	electric	vehicles	and	specifically	our	vehicles	in	an
automotive	industry	that	is	generally	competitive,	cyclical	and	volatile.
Though	we	continue	to	see	increased	interest	and	adoption	of	electric	vehicles,	if	the	market	for	electric	vehicles	in	general	and	Tesla	vehicles	in
particular	does	not	develop	as	we	expect,	develops	more	slowly	than	we	expect,	or	if	demand	for	our	vehicles	decreases	in	our	markets	or	our	vehicles
compete	with	each	other,	our	business,	prospects,	financial	condition	and	operating	results	may	be	harmed.
In	addition,	electric	vehicles	still	constitute	a	small	percentage	of	overall	vehicle	sales.	As	a	result,	the	market	for	our	vehicles	could	be	negatively
affected	by	numerous	factors,	such	as:
•
perceptions	about	electric	vehicle	features,	quality,	safety,	performance	and	cost;
•
perceptions	about	the	limited	range	over	which	electric	vehicles	may	be	driven	on	a	single	battery	charge,	and	access	to	charging	facilities;
•
competition,	including	from	other	types	of	alternative	fuel	vehicles,	plug-in	hybrid	electric	vehicles	and	high	fuel-economy	internal	combustion
engine	vehicles;
•
volatility	in	the	cost	of	oil,	gasoline	and	energy;
•
government	regulations	and	economic	incentives	and	conditions;	and
•
concerns	about	our	future	viability.
The	target	demographics	for	our	vehicles	are	highly	competitive.	Sales	of	vehicles	in	the	automotive	industry	tend	to	be	cyclical	in	many	markets,
which	may	expose	us	to	further	volatility.	We	also	cannot	predict	the	duration	or	direction	of	current	global	trends	or	their	sustained	impact	on	consumer
demand.	Ultimately,	we	continue	to	monitor	macroeconomic	conditions	to	remain	flexible	and	to	optimize	and	evolve	our	business	as	appropriate,	and
attempt	to	accurately	project	demand	and	infrastructure	requirements	globally	and	deploy	our	production,	workforce	and	other	resources	accordingly.
Rising	interest	rates	may	lead	to	consumers	to	increasingly	pull	back	spending,	including	on	our	products,	which	may	harm	our	demand,	business	and
operating	results.	If	we	experience	unfavorable	global	market	conditions,	or	if	we	cannot	or	do	not	maintain	operations	at	a	scope	that	is	commensurate
with	such	conditions	or	are	later	required	to	or	choose	to	suspend	such	operations	again,	our	business,	prospects,	financial	condition	and	operating	results
may	be	harmed.
We	face	strong	competition	for	our	products	and	services	from	a	growing	list	of	established	and	new	competitors.
The	worldwide	automotive	market	is	highly	competitive	today	and	we	expect	it	will	become	even	more	so	in	the	future.	A	significant	and	growing
number	of	established	and	new	automobile	manufacturers,	as	well	as	other	companies,	have	entered,	or	are	reported	to	have	plans	to	enter,	the	market
for	electric	and	other	alternative	fuel	vehicles,	including	hybrid,	plug-in	hybrid	and	fully	electric	vehicles,	as	well	as	the	market	for	self-driving	technology
and	other	vehicle	applications	and	software	platforms.	In	some	cases,	our	competitors	offer	or	will	offer	electric	vehicles	in	important	markets	such	as
China	and	Europe,	and/or	have	announced	an	intention	to	produce	electric	vehicles	exclusively	at	some	point	in	the	future.	In	addition,	certain
government	and	economic	incentives	which	provide	benefits	to	manufacturers	who	assemble	domestically	or	have	local	suppliers,	may	provide	a	greater
benefit	to	our	competitors,	which	could	negatively	impact	our	profitability.	Many	of	our	competitors	have	significantly	more	or	better-established
resources	than	we	do	to	devote	to	the	design,	development,	manufacturing,	distribution,	promotion,	sale	and	support	of	their	products.	Increased
competition	could	result	in	our	lower	vehicle	unit	sales,	price	reductions,	revenue	shortfalls,	loss	of	customers	and	loss	of	market	share,	which	may	harm
our	business,	financial	condition	and	operating	results.
17Table	of	Contents
We	also	face	competition	in	our	energy	generation	and	storage	business	from	other	manufacturers,	developers,	installers	and	service	providers	of
competing	energy	technologies,	as	well	as	from	large	utilities.	Decreases	in	the	retail	or	wholesale	prices	of	electricity	from	utilities	or	other	renewable
energy	sources	could	make	our	products	less	attractive	to	customers	and	lead	to	an	increased	rate	of	customer	defaults.
Risks	Related	to	Our	Operations
We	may	experience	issues	with	lithium-ion	cells	or	other	components	manufactured	at	our	Gigafactories,	which	may	harm	the
production	and	profitability	of	our	vehicle	and	energy	storage	products.
Our	plan	to	grow	the	volume	and	profitability	of	our	vehicles	and	energy	storage	products	depends	on	significant	lithium-ion	battery	cell	production,
including	by	our	partner	Panasonic	at	Gigafactory	Nevada.	We	also	produce	several	vehicle	components	at	our	Gigafactories,	such	as	battery	modules	and
packs	and	drive	units,	and	manufacture	energy	storage	products.	If	we	are	unable	to	or	otherwise	do	not	maintain	and	grow	our	respective	operations,	or
if	we	are	unable	to	do	so	cost-effectively	or	hire	and	retain	highly-skilled	personnel	there,	our	ability	to	manufacture	our	products	profitably	would	be
limited,	which	may	harm	our	business	and	operating	results.
Finally,	the	high	volumes	of	lithium-ion	cells	and	battery	modules	and	packs	manufactured	by	us	and	by	our	suppliers	are	stored	and	recycled	at	our
various	facilities.	Any	mishandling	of	these	products	may	cause	disruption	to	the	operation	of	such	facilities.	While	we	have	implemented	safety
procedures	related	to	the	handling	of	the	cells,	there	can	be	no	assurance	that	a	safety	issue	or	fire	related	to	the	cells	would	not	disrupt	our	operations.
Any	such	disruptions	or	issues	may	harm	our	brand	and	business.
We	face	risks	associated	with	maintaining	and	expanding	our	international	operations,	including	unfavorable	and	uncertain
regulatory,	political,	economic,	tax	and	labor	conditions.
We	are	subject	to	legal	and	regulatory	requirements,	political	uncertainty	and	social,	environmental	and	economic	conditions	in	numerous
jurisdictions,	including	markets	in	which	we	generate	significant	sales,	over	which	we	have	little	control	and	which	are	inherently	unpredictable.	Our
operations	in	such	jurisdictions,	particularly	as	a	company	based	in	the	U.S.,	create	risks	relating	to	conforming	our	products	to	regulatory	and	safety
requirements	and	charging	and	other	electric	infrastructures;	organizing	local	operating	entities;	establishing,	staffing	and	managing	foreign	business
locations;	attracting	local	customers;	navigating	foreign	government	taxes,	regulations	and	permit	requirements;	enforceability	of	our	contractual	rights;
trade	restrictions,	customs	regulations,	tariffs	and	price	or	exchange	controls;	and	preferences	in	foreign	nations	for	domestically	manufactured	products.
For	example,	we	monitor	tax	legislation	changes	on	a	global	basis,	including	changes	arising	as	a	result	of	the	Organization	for	Economic	Cooperation	and
Development’s	multi-jurisdictional	plan	of	action	to	address	base	erosion	and	profit	shifting.	Such	conditions	may	increase	our	costs,	impact	our	ability	to
sell	our	products	and	require	significant	management	attention,	and	may	harm	our	business	if	we	are	unable	to	manage	them	effectively.
Our	business	may	suffer	if	our	products	or	features	contain	defects,	fail	to	perform	as	expected	or	take	longer	than	expected	to
become	fully	functional.
If	our	products	contain	design	or	manufacturing	defects,	whether	relating	to	our	software	or	hardware,	that	cause	them	not	to	perform	as	designed
or	intended	or	that	require	repair,	or	certain	features	of	our	vehicles	such	as	new	Autopilot	or	FSD	Capability	features	take	longer	than	expected	to
become	enabled,	are	legally	restricted	or	become	subject	to	onerous	regulation,	our	ability	to	develop,	market	and	sell	our	products	and	services	may	be
harmed,	and	we	may	experience	delivery	delays,	product	recalls,	allegations	of	product	liability,	breach	of	warranty	and	related	consumer	protection
claims	and	significant	warranty	and	other	expenses.	While	we	are	continuously	working	to	develop	and	improve	our	products’	capability	and	performance,
there	is	no	guarantee	that	any	incremental	changes	in	the	specific	software	or	equipment	we	deploy	in	our	vehicles	over	time	will	not	result	in	initial
functional	disparities	from	prior	iterations	or	will	perform	as	forecast	in	the	timeframe	we	anticipate,	or	at	all.	Although	we	attempt	to	remedy	any	issues
we	observe	in	our	products	as	effectively	and	rapidly	as	possible,	such	efforts	may	not	be	timely,	may	hamper	production	or	may	not	completely	satisfy
our	customers.	We	have	performed,	and	continue	to	perform,	extensive	internal	testing	on	our	products	and	features,	though,	like	the	rest	of	the	industry,
we	currently	have	a	limited	frame	of	reference	by	which	to	evaluate	certain	aspects	of	their	long-term	quality,	reliability,	durability	and	performance
characteristics,	including	exposure	to	or	consequence	of	external	attacks.	While	we	attempt	to	identify	and	address	or	remedy	defects	we	identify	pre-
production	and	sale,	there	may	be	latent	defects	that	we	may	be	unable	to	detect	or	control	for	in	our	products,	and	thereby	address,	prior	to	their	sale	to
or	installation	for	customers.
18Table	of	Contents
We	may	be	required	to	defend	or	insure	against	product	liability	claims.
The	automobile	industry	generally	experiences	significant	product	liability	claims,	and	as	such	we	face	the	risk	of	such	claims	in	the	event	our
vehicles	do	not	perform	or	are	claimed	to	not	have	performed	as	expected.	As	is	true	for	other	automakers,	our	vehicles	have	been	involved	and	we
expect	in	the	future	will	be	involved	in	accidents	resulting	in	death	or	personal	injury,	and	such	accidents	where	Autopilot,	Enhanced	Autopilot	or	FSD
Capability	features	are	engaged	are	the	subject	of	significant	public	attention,	especially	in	light	of	NHTSA’s	Standing	General	Order	requiring	reports
regarding	crashes	involving	vehicles	with	advanced	driver	assistance	systems.	We	have	experienced,	and	we	expect	to	continue	to	face,	claims	and
regulatory	scrutiny	arising	from	or	related	to	misuse	or	claimed	failures	or	alleged	misrepresentations	of	such	new	technologies	that	we	are	pioneering.	In
addition,	the	battery	packs	that	we	produce	make	use	of	lithium-ion	cells.	On	rare	occasions,	lithium-ion	cells	can	rapidly	release	the	energy	they	contain
by	venting	smoke	and	flames	in	a	manner	that	can	ignite	nearby	materials	as	well	as	other	lithium-ion	cells.	While	we	have	designed	our	battery	packs	to
passively	contain	any	single	cell’s	release	of	energy	without	spreading	to	neighboring	cells,	there	can	be	no	assurance	that	a	field	or	testing	failure	of	our
vehicles	or	other	battery	packs	that	we	produce	will	not	occur,	in	particular	due	to	a	high-speed	crash.	Likewise,	as	our	solar	energy	systems	and	energy
storage	products	generate	and	store	electricity,	they	have	the	potential	to	fail	or	cause	injury	to	people	or	property.	Any	product	liability	claim	may
subject	us	to	lawsuits	and	substantial	monetary	damages,	product	recalls	or	redesign	efforts,	and	even	a	meritless	claim	may	require	us	to	defend	it,	all	of
which	may	generate	negative	publicity	and	be	expensive	and	time-consuming.	In	most	jurisdictions,	we	generally	self-insure	against	the	risk	of	product
liability	claims	for	vehicle	exposure,	meaning	that	any	product	liability	claims	will	likely	have	to	be	paid	from	company	funds	and	not	by	insurance.
We	will	need	to	maintain	public	credibility	and	confidence	in	our	long-term	business	prospects	in	order	to	succeed.
In	order	to	maintain	and	grow	our	business,	we	must	maintain	credibility	and	confidence	among	customers,	suppliers,	analysts,	investors,	ratings
agencies	and	other	parties	in	our	long-term	financial	viability	and	business	prospects.	Maintaining	such	confidence	may	be	challenging	due	to	our	limited
operating	history	relative	to	established	competitors;	customer	unfamiliarity	with	our	products;	any	delays	we	may	experience	in	scaling	manufacturing,
delivery	and	service	operations	to	meet	demand;	competition	and	uncertainty	regarding	the	future	of	electric	vehicles	or	our	other	products	and	services;
our	quarterly	production	and	sales	performance	compared	with	market	expectations;	and	other	factors	including	those	over	which	we	have	no	control.	In
particular,	Tesla’s	products,	business,	results	of	operations,	and	statements	and	actions	of	Tesla	and	its	management	are	subject	to	significant	amounts	of
commentary	by	a	range	of	third	parties.	Such	attention	can	include	criticism,	which	may	be	exaggerated	or	unfounded,	such	as	speculation	regarding	the
sufficiency	or	stability	of	our	management	team.	Any	such	negative	perceptions,	whether	caused	by	us	or	not,	may	harm	our	business	and	make	it	more
difficult	to	raise	additional	funds	if	needed.
We	may	be	unable	to	effectively	grow,	or	manage	the	compliance,	residual	value,	financing	and	credit	risks	related	to,	our	various
financing	programs.
We	offer	financing	arrangements	for	our	vehicles	in	North	America,	Europe	and	Asia	primarily	ourselves	and	through	various	financial	institutions.
We	also	currently	offer	vehicle	financing	arrangements	directly	through	our	local	subsidiaries	in	certain	markets.	Depending	on	the	country,	such
arrangements	are	available	for	specified	models	and	may	include	operating	leases	directly	with	us	under	which	we	typically	receive	only	a	very	small
portion	of	the	total	vehicle	purchase	price	at	the	time	of	lease,	followed	by	a	stream	of	payments	over	the	term	of	the	lease.	We	have	also	offered	various
arrangements	for	customers	of	our	solar	energy	systems	whereby	they	pay	us	a	fixed	payment	to	lease	or	finance	the	purchase	of	such	systems	or
purchase	electricity	generated	by	them.	If	we	do	not	successfully	monitor	and	comply	with	applicable	national,	state	and/or	local	financial	regulations	and
consumer	protection	laws	governing	these	transactions,	we	may	become	subject	to	enforcement	actions	or	penalties.
The	profitability	of	any	directly-leased	vehicles	returned	to	us	at	the	end	of	their	leases	depends	on	our	ability	to	accurately	project	our	vehicles’
residual	values	at	the	outset	of	the	leases,	and	such	values	may	fluctuate	prior	to	the	end	of	their	terms	depending	on	various	factors	such	as	supply	and
demand	of	our	used	vehicles,	economic	cycles	and	the	pricing	of	new	vehicles.	We	have	made	in	the	past	and	may	make	in	the	future	certain	adjustments
to	our	prices	from	time	to	time	in	the	ordinary	course	of	business,	which	may	impact	the	residual	values	of	our	vehicles	and	reduce	the	profitability	of	our
vehicle	leasing	program.	The	funding	and	growth	of	this	program	also	rely	on	our	ability	to	secure	adequate	financing	and/or	business	partners.	If	we	are
unable	to	adequately	fund	our	leasing	program	through	internal	funds,	partners	or	other	financing	sources,	and	compelling	alternative	financing	programs
are	not	available	for	our	customers	who	may	expect	or	need	such	options,	we	may	be	unable	to	grow	our	vehicle	deliveries.	Furthermore,	if	our	vehicle
leasing	business	grows	substantially,	our	business	may	suffer	if	we	cannot	effectively	manage	the	resulting	greater	levels	of	residual	risk.
19Table	of	Contents
Similarly,	we	have	provided	resale	value	guarantees	to	vehicle	customers	and	partners	for	certain	financing	programs,	under	which	such
counterparties	may	sell	their	vehicles	back	to	us	at	certain	points	in	time	at	pre-determined	amounts.	However,	actual	resale	values	are	subject	to
fluctuations	over	the	term	of	the	financing	arrangements,	such	as	from	the	vehicle	pricing	changes	discussed	above.	If	the	actual	resale	values	of	any
vehicles	resold	or	returned	to	us	pursuant	to	these	programs	are	materially	lower	than	the	pre-determined	amounts	we	have	offered,	our	financial
condition	and	operating	results	may	be	harmed.
Finally,	our	vehicle	and	solar	energy	system	financing	programs	and	our	energy	storage	sales	programs	also	expose	us	to	customer	credit	risk.	In
the	event	of	a	widespread	economic	downturn	or	other	catastrophic	event,	our	customers	may	be	unable	or	unwilling	to	satisfy	their	payment	obligations
to	us	on	a	timely	basis	or	at	all.	If	a	significant	number	of	our	customers	default,	we	may	incur	substantial	credit	losses	and/or	impairment	charges	with
respect	to	the	underlying	assets.
We	must	manage	ongoing	obligations	under	our	agreement	with	the	Research	Foundation	for	the	State	University	of	New	York
relating	to	our	Gigafactory	New	York.
We	are	party	to	an	operating	lease	and	a	research	and	development	agreement	through	the	State	University	of	New	York	(the	“SUNY	Foundation”).
These	agreements	provide	for	the	construction	and	use	of	our	Gigafactory	New	York,	which	we	have	primarily	used	for	the	development	and	production	of
our	Solar	Roof	and	other	solar	products	and	components,	energy	storage	components	and	Supercharger	components,	and	for	other	lessor-approved
functions.	Under	this	agreement,	we	are	obligated	to,	among	other	things,	meet	employment	targets	as	well	as	specified	minimum	numbers	of	personnel
in	the	State	of	New	York	and	in	Buffalo,	New	York	and	spend	or	incur	$
5.00
	billion	in	combined	capital,	operational	expenses,	costs	of	goods	sold	and
other	costs	in	the	State	of	New	York	during	a	period	that	was	initially	10	years	beginning	April	30,	2018.	As	of	December	31,	2023,	we	are	currently	in
excess	of	such	targets	relating	to	investments	and	personnel	in	the	State	of	New	York	and	Buffalo.	While	we	expect	to	have	and	grow	significant
operations	at	Gigafactory	New	York	and	the	surrounding	Buffalo	area,	any	failure	by	us	in	any	year	over	the	course	of	the	term	of	the	agreement	to	meet
all	applicable	future	obligations	may	result	in	our	obligation	to	pay	a	“program	payment”	of	$
41
	million	to	the	SUNY	Foundation	for	such	year,	the
termination	of	our	lease	at	Gigafactory	New	York	which	may	require	us	to	pay	additional	penalties,	and/or	the	need	to	adjust	certain	of	our	operations.
Any	of	the	foregoing	events	may	harm	our	business,	financial	condition	and	operating	results.
If	we	are	unable	to	attract,	hire	and	retain	key	employees	and	qualified	personnel,	our	ability	to	compete	may	be	harmed.
The	loss	of	the	services	of	any	of	our	key	employees	or	any	significant	portion	of	our	workforce	could	disrupt	our	operations	or	delay	the
development,	introduction	and	ramp	of	our	products	and	services.	In	particular,	we	are	highly	dependent	on	the	services	of	Elon	Musk,	Technoking	of
Tesla	and	our	Chief	Executive	Officer.	None	of	our	key	employees	is	bound	by	an	employment	agreement	for	any	specific	term	and	we	may	not	be	able	to
successfully	attract	and	retain	senior	leadership	necessary	to	grow	our	business.	Our	future	success	also	depends	upon	our	ability	to	attract,	hire	and
retain	a	large	number	of	engineering,	manufacturing,	marketing,	sales	and	delivery,	service,	installation,	technology	and	support	personnel,	especially	to
support	our	planned	high-volume	product	sales,	market	and	geographical	expansion	and	technological	innovations.	If	we	are	not	successful	in	managing
these	risks,	our	business,	financial	condition	and	operating	results	may	be	harmed.
Employees	may	leave	Tesla	or	choose	other	employers	over	Tesla	due	to	various	factors,	such	as	a	very	competitive	labor	market	for	talented
individuals	with	automotive	or	technology	experience,	or	any	negative	publicity	related	to	us.	In	regions	where	we	have	or	will	have	operations,
particularly	significant	engineering	and	manufacturing	centers,	there	is	strong	competition	for	individuals	with	skillsets	needed	for	our	business,	including
specialized	knowledge	of	electric	vehicles,	engineering	and	electrical	and	building	construction	expertise.	We	also	compete	with	both	mature	and
prosperous	companies	that	have	far	greater	financial	resources	than	we	do	and	start-ups	and	emerging	companies	that	promise	short-term	growth
opportunities.
Finally,	our	compensation	philosophy	for	all	of	our	personnel	reflects	our	startup	origins,	with	an	emphasis	on	equity-based	awards	and	benefits	in
order	to	closely	align	their	incentives	with	the	long-term	interests	of	our	stockholders.	We	periodically	seek	and	obtain	approval	from	our	stockholders	for
future	increases	to	the	number	of	awards	available	under	our	equity	incentive	and	employee	stock	purchase	plans.	If	we	are	unable	to	obtain	the	requisite
stockholder	approvals	for	such	future	increases,	we	may	have	to	expend	additional	cash	to	compensate	our	employees	and	our	ability	to	retain	and	hire
qualified	personnel	may	be	harmed.
20Table	of	Contents
We	are	highly	dependent	on	the	services	of	Elon	Musk,	Technoking	of	Tesla	and	our	Chief	Executive	Officer.
We	are	highly	dependent	on	the	services	of	Elon	Musk,	Technoking	of	Tesla	and	our	Chief	Executive	Officer.	Although	Mr.	Musk	spends	significant
time	with	Tesla	and	is	highly	active	in	our	management,	he	does	not	devote	his	full	time	and	attention	to	Tesla.	Mr.	Musk	also	currently	serves	as	Chief
Executive	Officer	and	Chief	Technical	Officer	of	Space	Exploration	Technologies	Corp.,	a	developer	and	manufacturer	of	space	launch	vehicles,	Chairman
and	Chief	Technical	Officer	of	X	Corp.,	a	social	media	company,	and	is	involved	in	other	emerging	technology	ventures.
Our	information	technology	systems	or	data,	or	those	of	our	service	providers	or	customers	or	users	could	be	subject	to	cyber-
attacks	or	other	security	incidents,	which	could	result	in	data	breaches,	intellectual	property	theft,	claims,	litigation,	regulatory
investigations,	significant	liability,	reputational	damage	and	other	adverse	consequences.
We	continue	to	expand	our	information	technology	systems	as	our	operations	grow,	such	as	product	data	management,	procurement,	inventory
management,	production	planning	and	execution,	sales,	service	and	logistics,	dealer	management,	financial,	tax	and	regulatory	compliance	systems.	This
includes	the	implementation	of	new	internally	developed	systems	and	the	deployment	of	such	systems	in	the	U.S.	and	abroad.	While,	we	maintain
information	technology	measures	designed	to	protect	us	against	intellectual	property	theft,	data	breaches,	sabotage	and	other	external	or	internal	cyber-
attacks	or	misappropriation,	our	systems	and	those	of	our	service	providers	are	potentially	vulnerable	to	malware,	ransomware,	viruses,	denial-of-service
attacks,	phishing	attacks,	social	engineering,	computer	hacking,	unauthorized	access,	exploitation	of	bugs,	defects	and	vulnerabilities,	breakdowns,
damage,	interruptions,	system	malfunctions,	power	outages,	terrorism,	acts	of	vandalism,	security	breaches,	security	incidents,	inadvertent	or	intentional
actions	by	employees	or	other	third	parties,	and	other	cyber-attacks.
To	the	extent	any	security	incident	results	in	unauthorized	access	or	damage	to	or	acquisition,	use,	corruption,	loss,	destruction,	alteration	or
dissemination	of	our	data,	including	intellectual	property	and	personal	information,	or	our	products	or	vehicles,	or	for	it	to	be	believed	or	reported	that	any
of	these	occurred,	it	could	disrupt	our	business,	harm	our	reputation,	compel	us	to	comply	with	applicable	data	breach	notification	laws,	subject	us	to	time
consuming,	distracting	and	expensive	litigation,	regulatory	investigation	and	oversight,	mandatory	corrective	action,	require	us	to	verify	the	correctness
of	database	contents,	or	otherwise	subject	us	to	liability	under	laws,	regulations	and	contractual	obligations,	including	those	that	protect	the	privacy	and
security	of	personal	information.	This	could	result	in	increased	costs	to	us	and	result	in	significant	legal	and	financial	exposure	and/or	reputational	harm.
We	also	rely	on	service	providers,	and	similar	incidents	relating	to	their	information	technology	systems	could	also	have	a	material	adverse	effect	on
our	business.	There	have	been	and	may	continue	to	be	significant	supply	chain	attacks.	Our	service	providers,	including	our	workforce	management
software	provider,	have	been	subject	to	ransomware	and	other	security	incidents,	and	we	cannot	guarantee	that	our	or	our	service	providers’	systems
have	not	been	breached	or	that	they	do	not	contain	exploitable	defects,	bugs,	or	vulnerabilities	that	could	result	in	a	security	incident,	or	other	disruption
to,	our	or	our	service	providers’	systems.	Our	ability	to	monitor	our	service	providers’	security	measures	is	limited,	and,	in	any	event,	malicious	third
parties	may	be	able	to	circumvent	those	security	measures.
Further,	the	implementation,	maintenance,	segregation	and	improvement	of	these	systems	require	significant	management	time,	support	and	cost,
and	there	are	inherent	risks	associated	with	developing,	improving	and	expanding	our	core	systems	as	well	as	implementing	new	systems	and	updating
current	systems,	including	disruptions	to	the	related	areas	of	business	operation.	These	risks	may	affect	our	ability	to	manage	our	data	and	inventory,
procure	parts	or	supplies	or	manufacture,	sell,	deliver	and	service	products,	adequately	protect	our	intellectual	property	or	achieve	and	maintain
compliance	with,	or	realize	available	benefits	under,	tax	laws	and	other	applicable	regulations.
Moreover,	if	we	do	not	successfully	implement,	maintain	or	expand	these	systems	as	planned,	our	operations	may	be	disrupted,	our	ability	to
accurately	and/or	timely	report	our	financial	results	could	be	impaired	and	deficiencies	may	arise	in	our	internal	control	over	financial	reporting,	which
may	impact	our	ability	to	certify	our	financial	results.	Moreover,	our	proprietary	information,	including	intellectual	property	and	personal	information,
could	be	compromised	or	misappropriated	and	our	reputation	may	be	adversely	affected.	If	these	systems	or	their	functionality	do	not	operate	as	we
expect	them	to,	we	may	be	required	to	expend	significant	resources	to	make	corrections	or	find	alternative	sources	for	performing	these	functions.
21Table	of	Contents
Any	unauthorized	control	or	manipulation	of	our	products’	systems	could	result	in	loss	of	confidence	in	us	and	our	products.
Our	products	contain	complex	information	technology	systems.	For	example,	our	vehicles	and	energy	storage	products	are	designed	with	built-in
data	connectivity	to	accept	and	install	periodic	remote	updates	from	us	to	improve	or	update	their	functionality.	While	we	have	implemented	security
measures	intended	to	prevent	unauthorized	access	to	our	information	technology	networks,	our	products	and	their	systems,	malicious	entities	have
reportedly	attempted,	and	may	attempt	in	the	future,	to	gain	unauthorized	access	to	modify,	alter	and	use	such	networks,	products	and	systems	to	gain
control	of,	or	to	change,	our	products’	functionality,	user	interface	and	performance	characteristics	or	to	gain	access	to	data	stored	in	or	generated	by	our
products.	We	encourage	reporting	of	potential	vulnerabilities	in	the	security	of	our	products	through	our	security	vulnerability	reporting	policy,	and	we
aim	to	remedy	any	reported	and	verified	vulnerability.	However,	there	can	be	no	assurance	that	any	vulnerabilities	will	not	be	exploited	before	they	can
be	identified,	or	that	our	remediation	efforts	are	or	will	be	successful.
Any	unauthorized	access	to	or	control	of	our	products	or	their	systems	or	any	loss	of	data	could	result	in	legal	claims	or	government	investigations.
In	addition,	regardless	of	their	veracity,	reports	of	unauthorized	access	to	our	products,	their	systems	or	data,	as	well	as	other	factors	that	may	result	in
the	perception	that	our	products,	their	systems	or	data	are	capable	of	being	hacked,	may	harm	our	brand,	prospects	and	operating	results.	We	have	been
the	subject	of	such	reports	in	the	past.
Our	business	may	be	adversely	affected	by	any	disruptions	caused	by	union	activities.
It	is	not	uncommon	for	employees	of	certain	trades	at	companies	such	as	ours	to	belong	to	a	union,	which	can	result	in	higher	employee	costs	and
increased	risk	of	work	stoppages.	Moreover,	regulations	in	some	jurisdictions	outside	of	the	U.S.	mandate	employee	participation	in	industrial	collective
bargaining	agreements	and	work	councils	with	certain	consultation	rights	with	respect	to	the	relevant	companies’	operations.	Although	we	work	diligently
to	provide	the	best	possible	work	environment	for	our	employees,	they	may	still	decide	to	join	or	seek	recognition	to	form	a	labor	union,	or	we	may	be
required	to	become	a	union	signatory.	From	time	to	time,	labor	unions	have	engaged	in	campaigns	to	organize	certain	of	our	operations,	as	part	of	which
such	unions	have	filed	unfair	labor	practice	charges	against	us	with	the	National	Labor	Relations	Board	(the	“NLRB”),	and	they	may	do	so	in	the	future.
Any	unfavorable	ultimate	outcome	for	Tesla	may	have	a	negative	impact	on	the	perception	of	Tesla’s	treatment	of	our	employees.	Furthermore,	we	are
directly	or	indirectly	dependent	upon	companies	with	unionized	work	forces,	such	as	suppliers	and	trucking	and	freight	companies.	Any	work	stoppages	or
strikes	organized	by	such	unions	could	delay	the	manufacture	and	sale	of	our	products	and	may	harm	our	business	and	operating	results.
We	may	choose	to	or	be	compelled	to	undertake	product	recalls	or	take	other	similar	actions.
As	a	manufacturing	company,	we	must	manage	the	risk	of	product	recalls	with	respect	to	our	products.	Recalls	for	our	vehicles	have	resulted	from
various	hardware	and	software-related	safety	concerns	or	non-compliance	determinations.	In	addition	to	recalls	initiated	by	us	for	various	causes,	testing
of	or	investigations	into	our	products	by	government	regulators	or	industry	groups	may	compel	us	to	initiate	product	recalls	or	may	result	in	negative
public	perceptions	about	the	safety	of	our	products,	even	if	we	disagree	with	the	defect	determination	or	have	data	that	contradicts	it.	In	the	future,	we
may	voluntarily	or	involuntarily	initiate	recalls	if	any	of	our	products	are	determined	by	us	or	a	regulator	to	contain	a	safety	defect	or	be	noncompliant
with	applicable	laws	and	regulations,	such	as	U.S.	Federal	Motor	Vehicle	Safety	Standards.	Such	recalls,	whether	voluntary	or	involuntary	or	caused	by
systems	or	components	engineered	or	manufactured	by	us	or	our	suppliers,	could	result	in	significant	expense,	supply	chain	complications	and	service
burdens,	and	may	harm	our	brand,	business,	prospects,	financial	condition	and	operating	results.
Our	current	and	future	warranty	reserves	may	be	insufficient	to	cover	future	warranty	claims.
We	provide	a	manufacturer’s	warranty	on	all	new	and	used	Tesla	vehicles	we	sell	directly	to	customers.	We	also	provide	certain	warranties	with
respect	to	the	energy	generation	and	storage	systems	we	sell,	including	on	their	installation	and	maintenance.	For	components	not	manufactured	by	us,
we	generally	pass	through	to	our	customers	the	applicable	manufacturers’	warranties,	but	may	retain	some	warranty	responsibilities	for	some	or	all	of	the
life	of	such	components.	As	part	of	our	energy	generation	and	storage	system	contracts,	we	may	provide	the	customer	with	performance	guarantees	that
guarantee	that	the	underlying	system	will	meet	or	exceed	the	minimum	energy	generation	or	other	energy	performance	requirements	specified	in	the
contract.	Under	these	performance	guarantees,	we	generally	bear	the	risk	of	electricity	production	or	other	performance	shortfalls,	including	in	some
cases	shortfalls	caused	by	failures	in	components	from	third	party	manufacturers.	These	risks	are	exacerbated	in	the	event	such	manufacturers	cease
operations	or	fail	to	honor	their	warranties.
22Table	of	Contents
If	our	warranty	reserves	are	inadequate	to	cover	future	warranty	claims	on	our	products,	our	financial	condition	and	operating	results	may	be
harmed.	Warranty	reserves	include	our	management’s	best	estimates	of	the	projected	costs	to	repair	or	to	replace	items	under	warranty,	which	are	based
on	actual	claims	incurred	to	date	and	an	estimate	of	the	nature,	frequency	and	costs	of	future	claims.	Such	estimates	are	inherently	uncertain	and
changes	to	our	historical	or	projected	experience,	especially	with	respect	to	products	that	we	have	introduced	relatively	recently	and/or	that	we	expect	to
produce	at	significantly	greater	volumes	than	our	past	products,	may	cause	material	changes	to	our	warranty	reserves	in	the	future.
Our	insurance	coverage	strategy	may	not	be	adequate	to	protect	us	from	all	business	risks.
We	may	be	subject,	in	the	ordinary	course	of	business,	to	losses	resulting	from	products	liability,	accidents,	acts	of	God	and	other	claims	against	us,
for	which	we	may	have	no	insurance	coverage.	As	a	general	matter,	we	do	not	maintain	as	much	insurance	coverage	as	many	other	companies	do,	and	in
some	cases,	we	do	not	maintain	any	at	all.	Additionally,	the	policies	that	we	do	have	may	include	significant	deductibles	or	self-insured	retentions,	policy
limitations	and	exclusions,	and	we	cannot	be	certain	that	our	insurance	coverage	will	be	sufficient	to	cover	all	future	losses	or	claims	against	us.	A	loss
that	is	uninsured	or	which	exceeds	policy	limits	may	require	us	to	pay	substantial	amounts,	which	may	harm	our	financial	condition	and	operating	results.
Our	debt	agreements	contain	covenant	restrictions	that	may	limit	our	ability	to	operate	our	business.
The	terms	of	certain	of	our	debt	facilities	contain,	and	any	of	our	other	future	debt	agreements	may	contain,	covenant	restrictions	that	may	limit	our
ability	to	operate	our	business,	including	restrictions	on	our	and/or	our	subsidiaries’	ability	to,	among	other	things,	incur	additional	debt	or	create	liens.	In
addition,	under	certain	circumstances	we	are	required	to	maintain	a	certain	amount	of	liquidity.	As	a	result	of	these	covenants,	our	ability	to	respond	to
changes	in	business	and	economic	conditions	and	engage	in	beneficial	transactions,	including	to	obtain	additional	financing	as	needed,	may	be	restricted.
Furthermore,	our	failure	to	comply	with	our	debt	covenants	could	result	in	a	default	under	our	debt	agreements,	which	could	permit	the	holders	to
accelerate	our	obligation	to	repay	the	debt.	If	any	of	our	debt	is	accelerated,	we	may	not	have	sufficient	funds	available	to	repay	it.
Additional	funds	may	not	be	available	to	us	when	we	need	or	want	them.
Our	business	and	our	future	plans	for	expansion	are	capital-intensive,	and	the	specific	timing	of	cash	inflows	and	outflows	may	fluctuate
substantially	from	period	to	period.	We	may	need	or	want	to	raise	additional	funds	through	the	issuance	of	equity,	equity-related	or	debt	securities	or
through	obtaining	credit	from	financial	institutions	to	fund,	together	with	our	principal	sources	of	liquidity,	the	costs	of	developing	and	manufacturing	our
current	or	future	products,	to	pay	any	significant	unplanned	or	accelerated	expenses	or	for	new	significant	strategic	investments,	or	to	refinance	our
significant	consolidated	indebtedness,	even	if	not	required	to	do	so	by	the	terms	of	such	indebtedness.	We	cannot	be	certain	that	additional	funds	will	be
available	to	us	on	favorable	terms	when	required,	or	at	all.	If	we	cannot	raise	additional	funds	when	we	need	them,	our	financial	condition,	results	of
operations,	business	and	prospects	could	be	materially	and	adversely	affected.
We	may	be	negatively	impacted	by	any	early	obsolescence	of	our	manufacturing	equipment.
We	depreciate	the	cost	of	our	manufacturing	equipment	over	their	expected	useful	lives.	However,	product	cycles	or	manufacturing	technology	may
change	periodically,	and	we	may	decide	to	update	our	products	or	manufacturing	processes	more	quickly	than	expected.	Moreover,	improvements	in
engineering	and	manufacturing	expertise	and	efficiency	may	result	in	our	ability	to	manufacture	our	products	using	less	of	our	currently	installed
equipment.	Alternatively,	as	we	ramp	and	mature	the	production	of	our	products	to	higher	levels,	we	may	discontinue	the	use	of	already	installed
equipment	in	favor	of	different	or	additional	equipment.	The	useful	life	of	any	equipment	that	would	be	retired	early	as	a	result	would	be	shortened,
causing	the	depreciation	on	such	equipment	to	be	accelerated,	and	our	results	of	operations	may	be	harmed.
There	is	no	guarantee	that	we	will	have	sufficient	cash	flow	from	our	business	to	pay	our	indebtedness	or	that	we	will	not	incur
additional	indebtedness.
As	of	December	31,	2023,	we	and	our	subsidiaries	had	outstanding	$4.68	billion	in	aggregate	principal	amount	of	indebtedness	(see	Note	11,	
Debt
,
to	the	consolidated	financial	statements	included	elsewhere	in	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K).	Our	consolidated	indebtedness	may	increase	our
vulnerability	to	any	generally	adverse	economic	and	industry	conditions.	We	and	our	subsidiaries	may,	subject	to	the	limitations	in	the	terms	of	our
existing	and	future	indebtedness,	incur	additional	debt,	secure	existing	or	future	debt	or	recapitalize	our	debt.
23Table	of	Contents
Our	ability	to	make	scheduled	payments	of	the	principal	and	interest	on	our	indebtedness	when	due,	to	make	payments	upon	conversion	or
repurchase	demands	with	respect	to	our	convertible	senior	notes	or	to	refinance	our	indebtedness	as	we	may	need	or	desire,	depends	on	our	future
performance,	which	is	subject	to	economic,	financial,	competitive	and	other	factors	beyond	our	control.	Our	business	may	not	continue	to	generate	cash
flow	from	operations	in	the	future	sufficient	to	satisfy	our	obligations	under	our	existing	indebtedness	and	any	future	indebtedness	we	may	incur,	and	to
make	necessary	capital	expenditures.	If	we	are	unable	to	generate	such	cash	flow,	we	may	be	required	to	adopt	one	or	more	alternatives,	such	as
reducing	or	delaying	investments	or	capital	expenditures,	selling	assets,	refinancing	or	obtaining	additional	equity	capital	on	terms	that	may	be	onerous
or	highly	dilutive.	Our	ability	to	refinance	existing	or	future	indebtedness	will	depend	on	the	capital	markets	and	our	financial	condition	at	such	time.	In
addition,	our	ability	to	make	payments	may	be	limited	by	law,	by	regulatory	authority	or	by	agreements	governing	our	future	indebtedness.	We	may	not
be	able	to	engage	in	these	activities	on	desirable	terms	or	at	all,	which	may	result	in	a	default	on	our	existing	or	future	indebtedness	and	harm	our
financial	condition	and	operating	results.
We	are	exposed	to	fluctuations	in	currency	exchange	rates.
We	transact	business	globally	in	multiple	currencies	and	have	foreign	currency	risks	related	to	our	revenue,	costs	of	revenue,	operating	expenses
and	localized	subsidiary	debt	denominated	in	currencies	other	than	the	U.S.	dollar.	To	the	extent	we	have	significant	revenues	denominated	in	such
foreign	currencies,	any	strengthening	of	the	U.S.	dollar	would	tend	to	reduce	our	revenues	as	measured	in	U.S.	dollars,	as	we	have	historically
experienced,	and	are	currently	experiencing.	In	addition,	a	portion	of	our	costs	and	expenses	have	been,	and	we	anticipate	will	continue	to	be,
denominated	in	foreign	currencies.	If	we	do	not	have	fully	offsetting	revenues	in	these	currencies	and	if	the	value	of	the	U.S.	dollar	depreciates
significantly	against	these	currencies,	our	costs	as	measured	in	U.S.	dollars	as	a	percent	of	our	revenues	will	correspondingly	increase	and	our	margins
will	suffer.	As	a	result,	our	operating	results	may	be	harmed.
We	may	not	be	able	to	adequately	protect	or	defend	ourselves	against	intellectual	property	infringement	claims,	which	may	be
time-consuming	and	expensive,	or	affect	the	freedom	to	operate	our	business.
Our	competitors	or	other	third	parties	may	hold	or	obtain	patents,	copyrights,	trademarks	or	other	proprietary	rights	that	could	prevent,	limit	or
interfere	with	our	ability	to	make,	use,	develop,	sell	or	market	our	products	and	services,	which	could	make	it	more	difficult	for	us	to	operate	our	business.
From	time	to	time,	the	holders	of	such	intellectual	property	rights	may	assert	their	rights	and	urge	us	to	take	licenses	and/or	may	bring	suits	alleging
infringement	or	misappropriation	of	such	rights,	which	could	result	in	substantial	costs,	negative	publicity	and	management	attention,	regardless	of	merit.
In	addition,	the	effective	protection	for	our	brands,	technologies,	and	proprietary	information	may	be	limited	or	unavailable	in	certain	countries,
making	it	difficult	to	protect	our	intellectual	property	from	misappropriation	or	infringement.	Although	we	make	reasonable	efforts	to	maintain	the
confidentiality	of	our	proprietary	information,	we	cannot	guarantee	that	these	actions	will	deter	or	prevent	misappropriation	of	our	intellectual	property.
The	theft	or	unauthorized	use	or	publication	of	our	trade	secrets	and	confidential	information	could	affect	our	competitive	position.
While	we	endeavor	to	obtain	and	protect	the	intellectual	property	rights	that	we	expect	will	allow	us	to	retain	or	advance	our	strategic	initiatives	in
these	circumstances,	there	can	be	no	assurance	that	we	will	be	able	to	adequately	identify	and	protect	the	portions	of	intellectual	property	that	are
strategic	to	our	business,	or	mitigate	the	risk	of	potential	suits	or	other	legal	demands	by	third	parties.	Accordingly,	we	may	consider	the	entering	into
licensing	agreements	with	respect	to	such	rights,	although	no	assurance	can	be	given	that	such	licenses	can	be	obtained	on	acceptable	terms	or	that
litigation	will	not	occur,	and	such	licenses	and	associated	litigation	could	significantly	increase	our	operating	expenses.	Further,	if	we	are	determined	to
have	or	believe	there	is	a	high	likelihood	that	we	have	infringed	upon	a	third	party’s	intellectual	property	rights,	we	may	be	required	to	cease	making,
selling	or	incorporating	certain	components	or	intellectual	property	into	the	goods	and	services	we	offer,	to	pay	substantial	damages	and/or	license
royalties,	to	redesign	our	products	and	services	and/or	to	establish	and	maintain	alternative	branding	for	our	products	and	services.	In	the	event	that	we
are	required	to	take	one	or	more	such	actions,	our	brand,	business,	financial	condition	and	operating	results	may	be	harmed.
Increased	scrutiny	and	changing	expectations	from	stakeholders	with	respect	to	the	Company’s	ESG	practices	may	result	in
additional	costs	or	risks.
Companies	across	many	industries	are	facing	increasing	scrutiny	related	to	their	environmental,	social	and	governance	(ESG)	practices.	Investor
advocacy	groups,	certain	institutional	investors,	investment	funds	and	other	influential	investors	are	also	increasingly	focused	on	ESG	practices	and	in
recent	years	have	placed	increasing	importance	on	the	non-financial	impacts	of	their	investments.	While	our	mission	is	to	accelerate	the	world’s	transition
to	sustainable	energy,	if	our	ESG	practices	do	not	meet	investor	or	other	industry	stakeholder	expectations,	which	continue	to	evolve,	we	may	incur
additional	costs	and	our	brand,	ability	to	attract	and	retain	qualified	employees	and	business	may	be	harmed.
24Table	of	Contents
Our	operations	could	be	adversely	affected	by	events	outside	of	our	control,	such	as	natural	disasters,	wars	or	health	epidemics.
We	may	be	impacted	by	natural	disasters,	wars,	health	epidemics,	weather	conditions,	the	long-term	effects	of	climate	change,	power	outages	or
other	events	outside	of	our	control.	For	example,	our	Fremont	Factory	and	Gigafactory	Nevada	are	located	in	seismically	active	regions	in	Northern
California	and	Nevada,	and	our	Gigafactory	Shanghai	is	located	in	a	flood-prone	area.	Moreover,	the	area	in	which	our	Gigafactory	Texas	is	located
experienced	severe	winter	storms	in	the	first	quarter	of	2021	that	had	a	widespread	impact	on	utilities	and	transportation.	If	major	disasters	such	as
earthquakes,	floods	or	other	climate-related	events	occur,	or	our	information	system	or	communication	breaks	down	or	operates	improperly,	our
headquarters	and	production	facilities	may	be	seriously	damaged,	or	we	may	have	to	stop	or	delay	production	and	shipment	of	our	products.	In	addition,
the	global	COVID-19	pandemic	has	impacted	economic	markets,	manufacturing	operations,	supply	chains,	employment	and	consumer	behavior	in	nearly
every	geographic	region	and	industry	across	the	world,	and	we	have	been,	and	may	in	the	future	be,	adversely	affected	as	a	result.	Also,	the	broader
consequences	in	the	current	conflict	between	Russia	and	Ukraine,	which	may	include	further	embargoes,	regional	instability	and	geopolitical	shifts;
airspace	bans	relating	to	certain	routes,	or	strategic	decisions	to	alter	certain	routes;	and	potential	retaliatory	action	by	the	Russian	government	against
companies,	and	the	extent	of	the	conflict	on	our	business	and	operating	results	cannot	be	predicted.	We	may	incur	expenses	or	delays	relating	to	such
events	outside	of	our	control,	which	could	have	a	material	adverse	impact	on	our	business,	operating	results	and	financial	condition.
Risks	Related	to	Government	Laws	and	Regulations
Demand	for	our	products	and	services	may	be	impacted	by	the	status	of	government	and	economic	incentives	supporting	the
development	and	adoption	of	such	products.
Government	and	economic	incentives	that	support	the	development	and	adoption	of	electric	vehicles	in	the	U.S.	and	abroad,	including	certain	tax
exemptions,	tax	credits	and	rebates,	may	be	reduced,	eliminated,	amended	or	exhausted	from	time	to	time.	For	example,	previously	available	incentives
favoring	electric	vehicles	in	certain	areas	have	expired	or	were	cancelled	or	temporarily	unavailable,	and	in	some	cases	were	not	eventually	replaced	or
reinstituted,	which	may	have	negatively	impacted	sales.	In	addition,	certain	government	and	economic	incentives	may	also	be	implemented	or	amended
to	provide	benefits	to	manufacturers	who	assemble	domestically,	have	local	suppliers	or	have	other	characteristics	that	may	not	apply	to	Tesla.	Such
developments	could	negatively	impact	demand	for	our	vehicles,	and	we	and	our	customers	may	have	to	adjust	to	them,	including	through	pricing
modifications.
In	addition,	certain	governmental	rebates,	tax	credits	and	other	financial	incentives	that	are	currently	available	with	respect	to	our	solar	and	energy
storage	product	businesses	allow	us	to	lower	our	costs	and	encourage	customers	to	buy	our	products	and	investors	to	invest	in	our	solar	financing	funds.
However,	these	incentives	may	expire	when	the	allocated	funding	is	exhausted,	reduced	or	terminated	as	renewable	energy	adoption	rates	increase,
sometimes	without	warning.	Likewise,	in	jurisdictions	where	net	metering	is	currently	available,	our	customers	receive	bill	credits	from	utilities	for	energy
that	their	solar	energy	systems	generate	and	export	to	the	grid	in	excess	of	the	electric	load	they	use.	The	benefit	available	under	net	metering	has	been
or	has	been	proposed	to	be	reduced,	altered	or	eliminated	in	several	jurisdictions,	and	has	also	been	contested	and	may	continue	to	be	contested	before
the	Federal	Energy	Regulatory	Commission.	Any	reductions	or	terminations	of	such	incentives	may	harm	our	business,	prospects,	financial	condition	and
operating	results	by	making	our	products	less	competitive	for	customers,	increasing	our	cost	of	capital	and	adversely	impacting	our	ability	to	attract
investment	partners	and	to	form	new	financing	funds	for	our	solar	and	energy	storage	assets.
Finally,	we	and	our	fund	investors	claim	these	U.S.	federal	tax	credits	and	certain	state	incentives	in	amounts	based	on	independently	appraised	fair
market	values	of	our	solar	and	energy	storage	systems.	Some	governmental	authorities	have	audited	such	values	and	in	certain	cases	have	determined
that	these	values	should	be	lower,	and	they	may	do	so	again	in	the	future.	Such	determinations	may	result	in	adverse	tax	consequences	and/or	our
obligation	to	make	indemnification	or	other	payments	to	our	funds	or	fund	investors.
We	are	subject	to	evolving	laws	and	regulations	that	could	impose	substantial	costs,	legal	prohibitions	or	unfavorable	changes
upon	our	operations	or	products.
As	we	grow	our	manufacturing	operations	in	additional	regions,	we	are	or	will	be	subject	to	complex	environmental,	manufacturing,	health	and
safety	laws	and	regulations	at	numerous	jurisdictional	levels	in	the	U.S.,	China,	Germany	and	other	locations	abroad,	including	laws	relating	to	the	use,
handling,	storage,	recycling,	disposal	and/or	human	exposure	to	hazardous	materials,	product	material	inputs	and	post-consumer	products	and	with
respect	to	constructing,	expanding	and	maintaining	our	facilities.	New,	or	changes	in,	environmental	and	climate	change	laws,	regulations	or	rules	could
also	lead	to	increased	costs	of	compliance,	including	remediations	of	any	discovered	issues,	and	changes	to	our	operations,	which	may	be	significant,	and
any	failures	to	comply	could	result	in	significant	expenses,	delays	or	fines.	In	addition,	as	we	have
25Table	of	Contents
increased	our	employee	headcount	and	operations,	we	are	and	may	continue	to	be	subject	to	increased	scrutiny,	including	litigation	and	government
investigations,	that	we	will	need	to	defend	against.	If	we	are	unable	to	successfully	defend	ourselves	in	such	litigation	or	government	investigations,	it
may	harm	our	brand,	ability	to	attract	and	retain	qualified	employees,	business	and	financial	condition.	We	are	also	subject	to	laws	and	regulations
applicable	to	the	supply,	manufacture,	import,	sale,	service	and	performance	of	our	products	both	domestically	and	abroad.	For	example,	in	countries
outside	of	the	U.S.,	we	are	required	to	meet	standards	relating	to	vehicle	safety,	fuel	economy	and	emissions	that	are	often	materially	different	from
equivalent	requirements	in	the	U.S.,	thus	resulting	in	additional	investment	into	the	vehicles	and	systems	to	ensure	regulatory	compliance	in	all	countries.
This	process	may	include	official	review	and	certification	of	our	vehicles	by	foreign	regulatory	agencies	prior	to	market	entry,	as	well	as	compliance	with
foreign	reporting	and	recall	management	systems	requirements.
In	particular,	we	offer	in	our	vehicles	in	certain	markets	Autopilot	and	FSD	Capability	features	that	today	assist	drivers	with	certain	tedious	and
potentially	dangerous	aspects	of	road	travel,	but	which	currently	require	drivers	to	remain	fully	engaged	in	the	driving	operation.	We	are	continuing	to
develop	our	Autopilot	and	FSD	Capability	technology.	There	are	a	variety	of	international,	federal	and	state	regulations	that	may	apply	to,	and	may
adversely	affect,	the	design	and	performance,	sale,	marketing,	registration	and	operation	of	Autopilot	and	FSD	Capability,	and	future	capability,	including
full	self-driving	vehicles	that	may	not	be	operated	by	a	human	driver.	This	includes	many	existing	vehicle	standards	that	were	not	originally	intended	to
apply	to	vehicles	that	may	not	be	operated	by	a	human	driver.	Such	regulations	continue	to	rapidly	change,	which	increases	the	likelihood	of	a	patchwork
of	complex	or	conflicting	regulations,	or	may	delay,	restrict	or	prohibit	the	availability	of	certain	functionalities	and	vehicle	designs,	which	could	adversely
affect	our	business.
Finally,	as	a	manufacturer,	installer	and	service	provider	with	respect	to	solar	generation	and	energy	storage	systems,	a	supplier	of	electricity
generated	and	stored	by	certain	of	the	solar	energy	and	energy	storage	systems	we	install	for	customers,	and	a	provider	of	grid	services	through	virtual
power	plant	models,	we	are	impacted	by	federal,	state	and	local	regulations	and	policies	concerning	the	import	or	export	of	components,	electricity
pricing,	the	interconnection	of	electricity	generation	and	storage	equipment	with	the	electrical	grid	and	the	sale	of	electricity	generated	by	third	party-
owned	systems.	If	regulations	and	policies	are	introduced	that	adversely	impact	the	import	or	export	of	components,	or	the	interconnection,	maintenance
or	use	of	our	solar	and	energy	storage	systems,	they	could	deter	potential	customers	from	purchasing	our	solar	and	energy	storage	products	and
services,	threaten	the	economics	of	our	existing	contracts	and	cause	us	to	cease	solar	and	energy	storage	system	sales	and	services	in	the	relevant
jurisdictions,	which	may	harm	our	business,	financial	condition	and	operating	results.
Any	failure	by	us	to	comply	with	a	variety	of	U.S.	and	international	privacy	and	consumer	protection	laws	may	harm	us.
Any	failure	by	us	or	our	vendors	or	other	business	partners	to	comply	with	our	public	privacy	notice	or	with	federal,	state	or	international	privacy,
data	protection	or	security	laws	or	regulations	relating	to	the	processing,	collection,	use,	retention,	security	and	transfer	of	personally	identifiable
information	could	result	in	regulatory	or	litigation-related	actions	against	us,	legal	liability,	fines,	damages,	ongoing	audit	requirements	and	other
significant	costs.	Substantial	expenses	and	operational	changes	may	be	required	in	connection	with	maintaining	compliance	with	such	laws,	and	even	an
unsuccessful	challenge	by	customers	or	regulatory	authorities	of	our	activities	could	result	in	adverse	publicity	and	could	require	a	costly	response	from
and	defense	by	us.	In	addition,	certain	privacy	laws	are	still	subject	to	a	high	degree	of	uncertainty	as	to	their	interpretation,	application	and	impact,	and
may	require	extensive	system	and	operational	changes,	be	difficult	to	implement,	increase	our	operating	costs,	adversely	impact	the	cost	or
attractiveness	of	the	products	or	services	we	offer,	or	result	in	adverse	publicity	and	harm	our	reputation.	For	example,	the	General	Data	Protection
Regulation	applies	to	the	processing	of	personal	information	collected	from	individuals	located	in	the	European	Union	requiring	certain	data	protection
measures	when	handling,	with	a	significant	risk	of	fines	for	noncompliance.	Similarly,	our	North	American	operations	are	subject	to	complex	and	changing
federal	and	US	state-specific	data	privacy	laws	and	regulations,	such	as	the	California	Consumer	Privacy	Act	which	imposes	certain	legal	obligations	on
our	use	and	processing	of	personal	information	related	to	California	residents.	Finally,	additional	privacy	and	cybersecurity	laws	have	come	into	effect	in
China.
These	laws	continue	to	develop	and	may	be	inconsistent	from	jurisdiction	to	jurisdiction.	Complying	with	emerging	and	changing	requirements	may
cause	us	to	incur	substantial	costs	and	make	enhancements	to	relevant	data	practices.	Noncompliance	could	result	in	significant	penalties	or	legal
liability.
In	addition	to	the	risks	related	to	general	privacy	regulation,	we	may	also	be	subject	to	specific	vehicle	manufacturer	obligations	relating	to
cybersecurity,	data	privacy	and	data	localization	requirements	which	place	additional	risks	to	our	international	operations.	Risks	and	penalties	could
include	ongoing	audit	requirements,	data	protection
26Table	of	Contents
authority	investigations,	legal	proceedings	by	international	governmental	entities	or	others	resulting	in	mandated	disclosure	of	sensitive	data	or	other
commercially	unfavorable	terms.	Notwithstanding	our	efforts	to	protect	the	security	and	integrity	of	our	customers’	personal	information,	we	may	be
required	to	expend	significant	resources	to	comply	with	data	breach	requirements	if,	for	example,	third	parties	improperly	obtain	and	use	the	personal
information	of	our	customers	or	we	otherwise	experience	a	data	loss	with	respect	to	the	personal	information	we	process	and	handle.	A	major	breach	of
our	network	security	and	systems	may	occur	despite	defensive	measures,	and	may	result	in	fines,	penalties	and	damages	and	harm	our	brand,	prospects
and	operating	results.
We	could	be	subject	to	liability,	penalties	and	other	restrictive	sanctions	and	adverse	consequences	arising	out	of	certain
governmental	investigations	and	proceedings.
We	are	cooperating	with	certain	government	investigations	as	discussed	in	Note	15,	
Commitments	and	Contingencies
,	to	the	consolidated	financial
statements	included	elsewhere	in	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K.	To	our	knowledge,	no	government	agency	in	any	such	ongoing	investigation	has
concluded	that	any	wrongdoing	occurred.	However,	we	cannot	predict	the	outcome	or	impact	of	any	such	ongoing	matters,	and	there	exists	the	possibility
that	we	could	be	subject	to	liability,	penalties	and	other	restrictive	sanctions	and	adverse	consequences	if	the	SEC,	the	U.S.	Department	of	Justice	or	any
other	government	agency	were	to	pursue	legal	action	in	the	future.	Moreover,	we	expect	to	incur	costs	in	responding	to	related	requests	for	information
and	subpoenas,	and	if	instituted,	in	defending	against	any	governmental	proceedings.
We	may	face	regulatory	challenges	to	or	limitations	on	our	ability	to	sell	vehicles	directly.
While	we	intend	to	continue	to	leverage	our	most	effective	sales	strategies,	including	sales	through	our	website,	we	may	not	be	able	to	sell	our
vehicles	through	our	own	stores	in	certain	states	in	the	U.S.	with	laws	that	may	be	interpreted	to	impose	limitations	on	this	direct-to-consumer	sales
model.	It	has	also	been	asserted	that	the	laws	in	some	states	limit	our	ability	to	obtain	dealer	licenses	from	state	motor	vehicle	regulators,	and	such
assertions	persist.	In	certain	locations,	decisions	by	regulators	permitting	us	to	sell	vehicles	have	been,	and	may	be,	challenged	by	dealer	associations
and	others	as	to	whether	such	decisions	comply	with	applicable	state	motor	vehicle	industry	laws.	We	have	prevailed	in	many	of	these	lawsuits	and	such
results	have	reinforced	our	continuing	belief	that	state	franchise	laws	were	not	intended	to	apply	to	a	manufacturer	that	does	not	have	franchise	dealers
anywhere	in	the	world.	In	some	states,	there	have	also	been	regulatory	and	legislative	efforts	by	dealer	associations	to	propose	laws	that,	if	enacted,
would	prevent	us	from	obtaining	dealer	licenses	in	their	states	given	our	current	sales	model.	A	few	states	have	passed	legislation	that	clarifies	our	ability
to	operate,	but	at	the	same	time	limits	the	number	of	dealer	licenses	we	can	obtain	or	stores	that	we	can	operate.	The	application	of	state	laws	applicable
to	our	operations	continues	to	be	difficult	to	predict.
Internationally,	there	may	be	laws	in	jurisdictions	we	have	not	yet	entered	or	laws	we	are	unaware	of	in	jurisdictions	we	have	entered	that	may
restrict	our	sales	or	other	business	practices.	Even	for	those	jurisdictions	we	have	analyzed,	the	laws	in	this	area	can	be	complex,	difficult	to	interpret	and
may	change	over	time.	Continued	regulatory	limitations	and	other	obstacles	interfering	with	our	ability	to	sell	vehicles	directly	to	consumers	may	harm
our	financial	condition	and	operating	results.
Risks	Related	to	the	Ownership	of	Our	Common	Stock
The	trading	price	of	our	common	stock	is	likely	to	continue	to	be	volatile.
The	trading	price	of	our	common	stock	has	been	highly	volatile	and	could	continue	to	be	subject	to	wide	fluctuations	in	response	to	various	factors,
some	of	which	are	beyond	our	control.	Our	common	stock	has	experienced	over	the	last	52	weeks	an	intra-day	trading	high	of	$299.29	per	share	and	a
low	of	$152.37	per	share.	The	stock	market	in	general,	and	the	market	for	technology	companies	in	particular,	has	experienced	extreme	price	and	volume
fluctuations	that	have	often	been	unrelated	or	disproportionate	to	the	operating	performance	of	those	companies.	In	particular,	a	large	proportion	of	our
common	stock	has	been	historically	and	may	in	the	future	be	traded	by	short	sellers	which	may	put	pressure	on	the	supply	and	demand	for	our	common
stock,	further	influencing	volatility	in	its	market	price.	Public	perception	of	our	company	or	management	and	other	factors	outside	of	our	control	may
additionally	impact	the	stock	price	of	companies	like	us	that	garner	a	disproportionate	degree	of	public	attention,	regardless	of	actual	operating
performance.	In	addition,	in	the	past,	following	periods	of	volatility	in	the	overall	market	or	the	market	price	of	our	shares,	securities	class	action	litigation
has	been	filed	against	us.	While	we	defend	such	actions	vigorously,	any	judgment	against	us	or	any	future	stockholder	litigation	could	result	in	substantial
costs	and	a	diversion	of	our	management’s	attention	and	resources.
27Table	of	Contents
Our	financial	results	may	vary	significantly	from	period	to	period	due	to	fluctuations	in	our	operating	costs	and	other	factors.
We	expect	our	period-to-period	financial	results	to	vary	based	on	our	operating	costs,	which	we	anticipate	will	fluctuate	as	the	pace	at	which	we
continue	to	design,	develop	and	manufacture	new	products	and	increase	production	capacity	by	expanding	our	current	manufacturing	facilities	and
adding	future	facilities,	may	not	be	consistent	or	linear	between	periods.	Additionally,	our	revenues	from	period	to	period	may	fluctuate	as	we	introduce
existing	products	to	new	markets	for	the	first	time	and	as	we	develop	and	introduce	new	products.	As	a	result	of	these	factors,	we	believe	that	quarter-to-
quarter	comparisons	of	our	financial	results,	especially	in	the	short	term,	are	not	necessarily	meaningful	and	that	these	comparisons	cannot	be	relied
upon	as	indicators	of	future	performance.	Moreover,	our	financial	results	may	not	meet	expectations	of	equity	research	analysts,	ratings	agencies	or
investors,	who	may	be	focused	only	on	short-term	quarterly	financial	results.	If	any	of	this	occurs,	the	trading	price	of	our	stock	could	fall	substantially,
either	suddenly	or	over	time.
We	may	fail	to	meet	our	publicly	announced	guidance	or	other	expectations	about	our	business,	which	could	cause	our	stock	price
to	decline.
We	provide	from	time	to	time	guidance	regarding	our	expected	financial	and	business	performance.	Correctly	identifying	key	factors	affecting
business	conditions	and	predicting	future	events	is	inherently	an	uncertain	process,	and	our	guidance	may	not	ultimately	be	accurate	and	has	in	the	past
been	inaccurate	in	certain	respects,	such	as	the	timing	of	new	product	manufacturing	ramps.	Our	guidance	is	based	on	certain	assumptions	such	as	those
relating	to	anticipated	production	and	sales	volumes	(which	generally	are	not	linear	throughout	a	given	period),	average	sales	prices,	supplier	and
commodity	costs	and	planned	cost	reductions.	If	our	guidance	varies	from	actual	results,	such	as	due	to	our	assumptions	not	being	met	or	the	impact	on
our	financial	performance	that	could	occur	as	a	result	of	various	risks	and	uncertainties,	the	market	value	of	our	common	stock	could	decline	significantly.
If	Elon	Musk	were	forced	to	sell	shares	of	our	common	stock,	either	that	he	has	pledged	to	secure	certain	personal	loan	obligations,
or	in	satisfaction	of	other	obligations,	such	sales	could	cause	our	stock	price	to	decline.
Certain	banking	institutions	have	made	extensions	of	credit	to	Elon	Musk,	our	Chief	Executive	Officer,	a	portion	of	which	was	used	to	purchase
shares	of	common	stock	in	certain	of	our	public	offerings	and	private	placements	at	the	same	prices	offered	to	third-party	participants	in	such	offerings
and	placements.	We	are	not	a	party	to	these	loans,	which	are	partially	secured	by	pledges	of	a	portion	of	the	Tesla	common	stock	currently	owned	by	Mr.
Musk.	If	the	price	of	our	common	stock	were	to	decline	substantially,	Mr.	Musk	may	be	forced	by	one	or	more	of	the	banking	institutions	to	sell	shares	of
Tesla	common	stock	to	satisfy	his	loan	obligations	if	he	could	not	do	so	through	other	means.	Any	such	sales	could	cause	the	price	of	our	common	stock
to	decline	further.	Further,	Mr.	Musk	from	time	to	time	may	commit	to	investing	in	significant	business	or	other	ventures,	and	as	a	result,	be	required	to
sell	shares	of	our	common	stock	in	satisfaction	of	such	commitments.
Anti-takeover	provisions	contained	in	our	governing	documents,	applicable	laws	and	our	convertible	senior	notes	could	impair	a
takeover	attempt.
Our	certificate	of	incorporation	and	bylaws	afford	certain	rights	and	powers	to	our	board	of	directors	that	may	facilitate	the	delay	or	prevention	of	an
acquisition	that	it	deems	undesirable.	We	are	also	subject	to	Section	203	of	the	Delaware	General	Corporation	Law	and	other	provisions	of	Delaware	law
that	limit	the	ability	of	stockholders	in	certain	situations	to	effect	certain	business	combinations.	In	addition,	the	terms	of	our	convertible	senior	notes	may
require	us	to	repurchase	such	notes	in	the	event	of	a	fundamental	change,	including	a	takeover	of	our	company.	Any	of	the	foregoing	provisions	and
terms	that	has	the	effect	of	delaying	or	deterring	a	change	in	control	could	limit	the	opportunity	for	our	stockholders	to	receive	a	premium	for	their	shares
of	our	common	stock,	and	could	also	affect	the	price	that	some	investors	are	willing	to	pay	for	our	common	stock.
ITEM	1B.	UNRESOLVED	STAFF	COMMENTS
None.
28ITEM	1C.	CYBERSECURITY
Cybersecurity	Risk	Management	and	Strategy
We	recognize	the	importance	of	assessing,	identifying,	and	managing	material	risks	associated	with	cybersecurity	threats,	as	such	term	is	defined	in
Item	106(a)	of	Regulation	S-K.	These	risks	include,	among	other	things:	operational	risks,	intellectual	property	theft,	fraud,	extortion,	harm	to	employees
or	customers	and	violation	of	data	privacy	or	security	laws.
Identifying	and	assessing	cybersecurity	risk	is	integrated	into	our	overall	risk	management	systems	and	processes.	Cybersecurity	risks	related	to	our
business,	technical	operations,	privacy	and	compliance	issues	are	identified	and	addressed	through	a	multi-faceted	approach	including	third	party
assessments,	internal	IT	Audit,	IT	security,	governance,	risk	and	compliance	reviews.	To	defend,	detect	and	respond	to	cybersecurity	incidents,	we,
among	other	things:	conduct	proactive	privacy	and	cybersecurity	reviews	of	systems	and	applications,	audit	applicable	data	policies,	perform	penetration
testing	using	external	third-party	tools	and	techniques	to	test	security	controls,	operate	a	bug	bounty	program	to	encourage	proactive	vulnerability
reporting,	conduct	employee	training,	monitor	emerging	laws	and	regulations	related	to	data	protection	and	information	security	(including	our	consumer
products)	and	implement	appropriate	changes.
We	have	implemented	incident	response	and	breach	management	processes	which	have	four	overarching	and	interconnected	stages:	1)
preparation	for	a	cybersecurity	incident,	2)	detection	and	analysis	of	a	security	incident,	3)	containment,	eradication	and	recovery,	and	4)	post-incident
analysis.	Such	incident	responses	are	overseen	by	leaders	from	our	Information	Security,	Product	Security,	Compliance	and	Legal	teams	regarding
matters	of	cybersecurity.
Security	events	and	data	incidents	are	evaluated,	ranked	by	severity	and	prioritized	for	response	and	remediation.	Incidents	are	evaluated	to
determine	materiality	as	well	as	operational	and	business	impact,	and	reviewed	for	privacy	impact.
We	also	conduct	tabletop	exercises	to	simulate	responses	to	cybersecurity	incidents.	Our	team	of	cybersecurity	professionals	then	collaborate	with
technical	and	business	stakeholders	across	our	business	units	to	further	analyze	the	risk	to	the	company,	and	form	detection,	mitigation	and	remediation
strategies.
As	part	of	the	above	processes,	we	regularly	engage	external	auditors	and	consultants	to	assess	our	internal	cybersecurity	programs	and
compliance	with	applicable	practices	and	standards.	As	of	2023,	our	Information	Security	Management	System	has	been	certified	to	conform	to	the
requirements	of	ISO/IEC	27001:2013.
Our	risk	management	program	also	assesses	third	party	risks,	and	we	perform	third-party	risk	management	to	identify	and	mitigate	risks	from	third
parties	such	as	vendors,	suppliers,	and	other	business	partners	associated	with	our	use	of	third-party	service	providers.	Cybersecurity	risks	are	evaluated
when	determining	the	selection	and	oversight	of	applicable	third-party	service	providers	and	potential	fourth-party	risks	when	handling	and/or	processing
our	employee,	business	or	customer	data.	In	addition	to	new	vendor	onboarding,	we	perform	risk	management	during	third-party	cybersecurity
compromise	incidents	to	identify	and	mitigate	risks	to	us	from	third-party	incidents.
We	describe	whether	and	how	risks	from	identified	cybersecurity	threats,	including	as	a	result	of	any	previous	cybersecurity	incidents,	have
materially	affected	or	are	reasonably	likely	to	materially	affect	us,	including	our	business	strategy,	results	of	operations,	or	financial	condition,	under	the
heading	“Our	information	technology	systems	or	data,	or	those	of	our	service	providers	or	customers	or	users	could	be	subject	to	cyber-attacks	or	other
security	incidents,	which	could	result	in	data	breaches,	intellectual	property	theft,	claims,	litigation,	regulatory	investigations,	significant	liability,
reputational	damage	and	other	adverse	consequences”	included	as	part	of	our	risk	factor	disclosures	at	Item	1A	of	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K.
Cybersecurity	Governance
Cybersecurity	is	an	important	part	of	our	risk	management	processes	and	an	area	of	focus	for	our	Board	and	management.	Our	Audit	Committee	is
responsible	for	the	oversight	of	risks	from	cybersecurity	threats.	Members	of	the	Audit	Committee	receive	updates	on	a	quarterly	basis	from	senior
management,	including	leaders	from	our	Information	Security,	Product	Security,	Compliance	and	Legal	teams	regarding	matters	of	cybersecurity.	This
includes	existing	and	new	cybersecurity	risks,	status	on	how	management	is	addressing	and/or	mitigating	those	risks,	cybersecurity	and	data	privacy
incidents	(if	any)	and	status	on	key	information	security	initiatives.	Our	Board	members	also	engage	in	ad	hoc	conversations	with	management	on
cybersecurity-related	news	events	and	discuss	any	updates	to	our	cybersecurity	risk	management	and	strategy	programs.
29Our	cybersecurity	risk	management	and	strategy	processes	are	overseen	by	leaders	from	our	Information	Security,	Product	Security,	Compliance
and	Legal	teams.	Such	individuals	have	an	average	of	over	15	years	of	prior	work	experience	in	various	roles	involving	information	technology,	including
security,	auditing,	compliance,	systems	and	programming.	These	individuals	are	informed	about,	and	monitor	the	prevention,	mitigation,	detection	and
remediation	of	cybersecurity	incidents	through	their	management	of,	and	participation	in,	the	cybersecurity	risk	management	and	strategy	processes
described	above,	including	the	operation	of	our	incident	response	plan,	and	report	to	the	Audit	Committee	on	any	appropriate	items.
ITEM	2.	PROPERTIES
We	are	headquartered	in	Austin,	Texas.	Our	principal	facilities	include	a	large	number	of	properties	in	North	America,	Europe	and	Asia	utilized	for
manufacturing	and	assembly,	warehousing,	engineering,	retail	and	service	locations,	Supercharger	sites	and	administrative	and	sales	offices.	Our	facilities
are	used	to	support	both	of	our	reporting	segments,	and	are	suitable	and	adequate	for	the	conduct	of	our	business.	We	generally	lease	such	facilities	with
the	primary	exception	of	some	manufacturing	facilities.	The	following	table	sets	forth	the	location	of	our	primary	owned	and	leased	manufacturing
facilities.
Primary	Manufacturing	Facilities
Location
Owned	or	Leased
Gigafactory	Texas
Austin,	Texas
Owned
Fremont	Factory
Fremont,	California
Owned
Gigafactory	Nevada
Sparks,	Nevada
Owned
Gigafactory	Berlin-Brandenburg
Grunheide,	Germany
Owned
Gigafactory	Shanghai
Shanghai,	China
*
Gigafactory	New	York
Buffalo,	New	York
Leased
Megafactory
Lathrop,	California
Leased
*
We	own	the	building	and	the	land	use	rights	with	an	initial	term	of	50	years.	The	land	use	rights	are	treated	as	operating	lease	right-of-use	assets.
ITEM	3.	LEGAL	PROCEEDINGS
For	a	description	of	our	material	pending	legal	proceedings,	please	see	Note	15,	
Commitments	and	Contingencies
,	to	the	consolidated	financial
statements	included	elsewhere	in	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K.
In	addition,	each	of	the	matters	below	is	being	disclosed	pursuant	to	Item	103	of	Regulation	S-K	because	it	relates	to	environmental	regulations	and
aggregate	civil	penalties	that	we	currently	believe	could	potentially	exceed	$1	million.	We	believe	that	any	proceeding	that	is	material	to	our	business	or
financial	condition	is	likely	to	have	potential	penalties	far	in	excess	of	such	amount.
District	attorneys	in	certain	California	counties	conducted	an	investigation	into	Tesla’s	waste	segregation	practices	pursuant	to	Cal.	Health	&	Saf.
Code	§	25100	et	seq.	and	Cal.	Civil	Code	§	1798.80.	Tesla	has	implemented	various	remedial	measures,	including	conducting	training	and	audits,	and
enhancements	to	its	site	waste	management	programs,	and	settlement	discussions	are	ongoing.	While	the	outcome	of	this	matter	cannot	be	determined
at	this	time,	it	is	not	currently	expected	to	have	a	material	adverse	impact	on	our	business.
ITEM	4.	MINE	SAFETY	DISCLOSURES
Not	applicable.
30PART	II
ITEM	5.	MARKET	FOR	REGISTRANT’S	COMMON	EQUITY,	RELATED	STOCKHOLDER	MATTERS	AND	ISSUER	PURCHASES	OF	EQUITY
SECURITIES
Market	Information
Our	common	stock	has	traded	on	The	NASDAQ	Global	Select	Market	under	the	symbol	“TSLA”	since	it	began	trading	on	June	29,	2010.	Our	initial
public	offering	was	priced	at	approximately	$1.13	per	share	on	June	28,	2010	as	adjusted	to	give	effect	to	the	three-for-one	stock	split	effected	in	the
form	of	a	stock	dividend	in	August	2022	(the	“2022	Stock	Split”)	and	the	five-for-one	stock	split	effected	in	the	form	of	a	stock	dividend	in	August	2020
(the	“2020	Stock	Split”).
Holders
As	of	January	22,	2024,	there	were	9,300	holders	of	record	of	our	common	stock.	A	substantially	greater	number	of	holders	of	our	common	stock	are
“street	name”	or	beneficial	holders,	whose	shares	are	held	by	banks,	brokers	and	other	financial	institutions.
Dividend	Policy
We	have	never	declared	or	paid	cash	dividends	on	our	common	stock.	We	currently	do	not	anticipate	paying	any	cash	dividends	in	the	foreseeable
future.	Any	future	determination	to	declare	cash	dividends	will	be	made	at	the	discretion	of	our	board	of	directors,	subject	to	applicable	laws,	and	will
depend	on	our	financial	condition,	results	of	operations,	capital	requirements,	general	business	conditions	and	other	factors	that	our	board	of	directors
may	deem	relevant.
Stock	Performance	Graph
This	performance	graph	shall	not	be	deemed	“filed”	for	purposes	of	Section	18	of	the	Securities	Exchange	Act	of	1934,	as	amended	(the	“Exchange
Act”),	or	incorporated	by	reference	into	any	filing	of	Tesla,	Inc.	under	the	Securities	Act	of	1933,	as	amended	(the	“Securities	Act”),	or	the	Exchange	Act,
except	as	shall	be	expressly	set	forth	by	specific	reference	in	such	filing.
The	following	graph	shows	a	comparison,	from	January	1,	2019	through	December	31,	2023,	of	the	cumulative	total	return	on	our	common	stock,
The	NASDAQ	Composite	Index	and	a	group	of	all	public	companies	sharing	the	same	SIC	code	as	us,	which	is	SIC	code	3711,	“Motor	Vehicles	and
Passenger	Car	Bodies”	(Motor	Vehicles	and	Passenger	Car	Bodies	Public	Company	Group).	Such	returns	are	based	on	historical	results	and	are	not
intended	to	suggest	future	performance.	Data	for	The	NASDAQ	Composite	Index	and	the	Motor	Vehicles	and	Passenger	Car	Bodies	Public	Company	Group
assumes	an	investment	of	$100	on	January	1,	2019	and	reinvestment	of	dividends.	We	have	never	declared	or	paid	cash	dividends	on	our	common	stock
nor	do	we	anticipate	paying	any	such	cash	dividends	in	the	foreseeable	future.
31Unregistered	Sales	of	Equity	Securities	and	Use	of	Proceeds
None.
Purchases	of	Equity	Securities	by	the	Issuer	and	Affiliated	Purchasers
None.
ITEM	6.	[RESERVED]
32ITEM	7.	MANAGEMENT’S	DISCUSSION	AND	ANALYSIS	OF	FINANCIAL	CONDITION	AND	RESULTS	OF	OPERATIONS
The	following	discussion	and	analysis	should	be	read	in	conjunction	with	the	consolidated	financial	statements	and	the	related	notes	included
elsewhere	in	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K.	For	further	discussion	of	our	products	and	services,	technology	and	competitive	strengths,	refer	to	Item	1-
Business.	For	discussion	related	to	changes	in	financial	condition	and	the	results	of	operations	for	fiscal	year	2022-related	items,	refer	to	Part	II,	Item	7.
Management’s	Discussion	and	Analysis	of	Financial	Condition	and	Results	of	Operations	in	our	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K	for	fiscal	year	2022,	which	was
filed	with	the	Securities	and	Exchange	Commission	on	January	31,	2023.
Overview	and	2023	Highlights
Our	mission	is	to	accelerate	the	world’s	transition	to	sustainable	energy.	We	design,	develop,	manufacture,	lease	and	sell	high-performance	fully
electric	vehicles,	solar	energy	generation	systems	and	energy	storage	products.	We	also	offer	maintenance,	installation,	operation,	charging,	insurance,
financial	and	other	services	related	to	our	products.	Additionally,	we	are	increasingly	focused	on	products	and	services	based	on	artificial	intelligence,
robotics	and	automation.
In	2023,	we	produced	1,845,985	consumer	vehicles	and	delivered	1,808,581	consumer	vehicles.	We	are	currently	focused	on	increasing	vehicle
production,	capacity	and	delivery	capabilities,	reducing	costs,	improving	and	developing	our	vehicles	and	battery	technologies,	vertically	integrating	and
localizing	our	supply	chain,	improving	and	further	deploying	our	FSD	capabilities,	increasing	the	affordability	and	efficiency	of	our	vehicles,	bringing	new
products	to	market	and	expanding	our	global	infrastructure,	including	our	service	and	charging	infrastructure.
In	2023,	we	deployed	14.72	GWh	of	energy	storage	products	and	223	megawatts	of	solar	energy	systems.	We	are	currently	focused	on	ramping
production	of	energy	storage	products,	improving	our	Solar	Roof	installation	capability	and	efficiency,	and	increasing	market	share	of	retrofit	solar	energy
systems.
In	2023,	we	recognized	total	revenues	of	$96.77	billion,	representing	an	increase	of	$15.31	billion,	compared	to	the	prior	year.	We	continue	to	ramp
production,	build	new	manufacturing	capacity	and	expand	our	operations	to	enable	increased	deliveries	and	deployments	of	our	products,	and	invest	in
research	and	development	to	accelerate	our	AI,	software	and	fleet-based	profits	for	further	revenue	growth.
In	2023,	our	net	income	attributable	to	common	stockholders	was	$15.00	billion,	representing	a	favorable	change	of	$2.44	billion,	compared	to	the
prior	year.	This	included	a	one-time	non-cash	tax	benefit	of	$5.93	billion	for	the	release	of	valuation	allowance	on	certain	deferred	tax	assets.	We	continue
to	focus	on	further	cost	reductions	and	operational	efficiencies	while	maximizing	delivery	volumes.
We	ended	2023	with	$29.09	billion	in	cash	and	cash	equivalents	and	investments,	representing	an	increase	of	$6.91	billion	from	the	end	of	2022.
Our	cash	flows	provided	by	operating	activities	in	2023	and	2022	were	$13.26	billion	and	$14.72	billion,	respectively,	representing	a	decrease	of	$1.47
billion.	Capital	expenditures	amounted	to	$8.90	billion	in	2023,	compared	to	$7.16	billion	in	2022,	representing	an	increase	of	$1.74	billion.	Sustained
growth	has	allowed	our	business	to	generally	fund	itself,	and	we	will	continue	investing	in	a	number	of	capital-intensive	projects	and	research	and
development	in	upcoming	periods.
33Management	Opportunities,	Challenges	and	Uncertainties	and	2024	Outlook
Automotive—Production
The	following	is	a	summary	of	the	status	of	production	of	each	of	our	announced	vehicle	models	in	production	and	under	development,	as	of	the
date	of	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K:
Production	Location
Vehicle	Model(s)
Production	Status
Fremont	Factory
Model	S	/	Model	X
Active
	
Model	3	/	Model	Y
Active
Gigafactory	Shanghai
Model	3	/	Model	Y
Active
Gigafactory	Berlin-Brandenburg
Model	Y
Active
Gigafactory	Texas
Model	Y
Active
	
Cybertruck
Active
Gigafactory	Nevada
Tesla	Semi
Pilot	production
Various
Next	Generation	Platform
In	development
TBD
Tesla	Roadster
In	development
We	are	focused	on	growing	our	manufacturing	capacity,	which	includes	capacity	for	manufacturing	new	vehicle	models	such	as	our	Cybertruck	and
next	generation	platform,	and	ramping	all	of	our	production	vehicles	to	their	installed	production	capacities	as	well	as	increasing	production	rate	and
efficiency	at	our	current	factories.	The	next	phase	of	production	growth	will	depend	on	the	continued	ramp	at	our	factories	and	the	introduction	of	our
next	generation	platform,	as	well	as	our	ability	to	add	to	our	available	sources	of	battery	cell	supply	by	manufacturing	our	own	cells	that	we	are
developing	to	have	high-volume	output,	lower	capital	and	production	costs	and	longer	range.	Our	goals	are	to	improve	vehicle	performance,	decrease
production	costs	and	increase	affordability	and	customer	awareness.
These	plans	are	subject	to	uncertainties	inherent	in	establishing	and	ramping	manufacturing	operations,	which	may	be	exacerbated	by	new	product
and	manufacturing	technologies	we	introduce,	the	number	of	concurrent	international	projects,	any	industry-wide	component	constraints,	labor	shortages
and	any	future	impact	from	events	outside	of	our	control.	For	example,	during	the	third	quarter	of	2023,	we	experienced	a	sequential	decline	in
production	volumes	due	to	pre-planned	shutdowns	for	upgrades	at	various	factories.	Moreover,	we	have	set	ambitious	technological	targets	with	our
plans	for	battery	cells	as	well	as	for	iterative	manufacturing	and	design	improvements	for	our	vehicles	with	each	new	factory.
Automotive—Demand,	Sales,	Deliveries	and	Infrastructure
Our	cost	reduction	efforts,	cost	innovation	strategies,	and	additional	localized	procurement	and	manufacturing	are	key	to	our	vehicles’	affordability
and	have	allowed	us	to	competitively	price	our	vehicles.	We	will	also	continue	to	generate	demand	and	brand	awareness	by	improving	our	vehicles’
performance	and	functionality,	including	through	products	based	on	artificial	intelligence	such	as	Autopilot,	FSD	Capability,	and	other	software	features
and	delivering	new	vehicles,	such	as	our	Cybertruck.	Moreover,	we	expect	to	continue	to	benefit	from	ongoing	electrification	of	the	automotive	sector	and
increasing	environmental	regulations	and	initiatives.
However,	we	operate	in	a	cyclical	industry	that	is	sensitive	to	political	and	regulatory	uncertainty,	including	with	respect	to	trade	and	the
environment,	all	of	which	can	be	compounded	by	inflationary	pressures,	rising	energy	prices,	interest	rate	fluctuations	and	the	liquidity	of	enterprise
customers.	For	example,	inflationary	pressures	have	increased	across	the	markets	in	which	we	operate.	In	an	effort	to	curb	this	trend,	central	banks	in
developed	countries	raised	interest	rates	rapidly	and	substantially,	impacting	the	affordability	of	vehicle	lease	and	finance	arrangements.	Further,	sales	of
vehicles	in	the	automotive	industry	also	tend	to	be	cyclical	in	many	markets,	which	may	expose	us	to	increased	volatility	as	we	expand	and	adjust	our
operations.	Moreover,	as	additional	competitors	enter	the	marketplace	and	help	bring	the	world	closer	to	sustainable	transportation,	we	will	have	to
adjust	and	continue	to	execute	well	to	maintain	our	momentum.	Additionally,	our	suppliers’	liquidity	and	allocation	plans	may	be	affected	by	current
challenges	in	the	North	American	automotive	industry,	which	could	reduce	our	access	to	components	or	result	in	unfavorable	changes	to	cost.	These
macroeconomic	and	industry	trends	have	had,	and	will	likely	continue	to	have,	an	impact	on	the	pricing	of,	and	order	rate	for	our	vehicles,	and	in	turn	our
operating	margin.	Changes	in	government	and	economic	incentives	in	relation	to	electric	vehicles	may	also	impact	our	sales.	We	will	continue	to	adjust
accordingly	to	such	developments,	and	we	believe	our	ongoing	cost	reduction,	including	improved	production	innovation	and	efficiency	at	our	newest
factories	and	lower	logistics	costs,	and	focus	on	operating	leverage	will	continue	to	benefit	us	in	relation	to	our	competitors,	while	our	new	products	will
help	enable	future	growth.
34As	our	production	increases,	we	must	work	constantly	to	similarly	increase	vehicle	delivery	capability	so	that	it	does	not	become	a	bottleneck	on	our
total	deliveries.	We	are	also	committed	to	reducing	the	percentage	of	vehicles	delivered	in	the	third	month	of	each	quarter,	which	will	help	to	reduce	the
cost	per	vehicle.	As	we	expand	our	manufacturing	operations	globally,	we	will	also	have	to	continue	to	increase	and	staff	our	delivery,	servicing	and
charging	infrastructure	accordingly,	maintain	our	vehicle	reliability	and	optimize	our	Supercharger	locations	to	ensure	cost	effectiveness	and	customer
satisfaction.	In	particular,	as	other	automotive	manufacturers	have	announced	their	adoption	of	the	North	American	Charging	Standard	(“NACS”)	and
agreements	with	us	to	utilize	our	Superchargers,	we	must	correspondingly	expand	our	network	in	order	to	ensure	adequate	availability	to	meet	customer
demands.	We	also	remain	focused	on	continued	enhancements	of	the	capability	and	efficiency	of	our	servicing	operations.
Energy	Generation	and	Storage	Demand,	Production	and	Deployment
The	long-term	success	of	this	business	is	dependent	upon	increasing	margins	through	greater	volumes.	We	continue	to	increase	the	production	of
our	energy	storage	products	to	meet	high	levels	of	demand,	including	the	construction	of	a	new	Megafactory	in	Shanghai	and	the	ongoing	ramp	at	our
Megafactory	in	Lathrop,	California.	For	Megapack,	energy	storage	deployments	can	vary	meaningfully	quarter	to	quarter	depending	on	the	timing	of
specific	project	milestones.	We	remain	committed	to	growing	our	retrofit	solar	energy	business	by	offering	a	low-cost	and	simplified	online	ordering
experience.	In	addition,	we	continue	to	seek	to	improve	our	installation	capabilities	and	price	efficiencies	for	Solar	Roof.	As	these	product	lines	grow,	we
will	have	to	maintain	adequate	battery	cell	supply	for	our	energy	storage	products	and	ensure	the	availability	of	qualified	personnel,	particularly	skilled
electricians,	to	support	the	ramp	of	Solar	Roof.
Cash	Flow	and	Capital	Expenditure	Trends
Our	capital	expenditures	are	typically	difficult	to	project	beyond	the	short-term	given	the	number	and	breadth	of	our	core	projects	at	any	given	time,
and	may	further	be	impacted	by	uncertainties	in	future	global	market	conditions.	We	are	simultaneously	ramping	new	products,	building	or	ramping
manufacturing	facilities	on	three	continents,	piloting	the	development	and	manufacture	of	new	battery	cell	technologies,	expanding	our	Supercharger
network	and	investing	in	autonomy	and	other	artificial	intelligence	enabled	training	and	products,	and	the	pace	of	our	capital	spend	may	vary	depending
on	overall	priority	among	projects,	the	pace	at	which	we	meet	milestones,	production	adjustments	to	and	among	our	various	products,	increased	capital
efficiencies	and	the	addition	of	new	projects.	Owing	and	subject	to	the	foregoing	as	well	as	the	pipeline	of	announced	projects	under	development,	all
other	continuing	infrastructure	growth	and	varying	levels	of	inflation,	we	currently	expect	our	capital	expenditures	to	exceed	$10.00	billion	in	2024	and	be
between	$8.00	to	$10.00	billion	in	each	of	the	following	two	fiscal	years.
Our	business	has	been	consistently	generating	cash	flow	from	operations	in	excess	of	our	level	of	capital	spend,	and	with	better	working	capital
management	resulting	in	shorter	days	sales	outstanding	than	days	payable	outstanding,	our	sales	growth	is	also	generally	facilitating	positive	cash
generation.	We	have	and	will	continue	to	utilize	such	cash	flows,	among	other	things,	to	do	more	vertical	integration,	expand	our	product	roadmap	and
provide	financing	options	to	our	customers.	At	the	same	time,	we	are	likely	to	see	heightened	levels	of	capital	expenditures	during	certain	periods
depending	on	the	specific	pace	of	our	capital-intensive	projects	and	other	potential	variables	such	as	rising	material	prices	and	increases	in	supply	chain
and	labor	expenses	resulting	from	changes	in	global	trade	conditions	and	labor	availability.	Overall,	we	expect	our	ability	to	be	self-funding	to	continue	as
long	as	macroeconomic	factors	support	current	trends	in	our	sales.
Critical	Accounting	Policies	and	Estimates
The	consolidated	financial	statements	are	prepared	in	accordance	with	accounting	principles	generally	accepted	in	the	U.S.	(“GAAP”).	The
preparation	of	the	consolidated	financial	statements	requires	us	to	make	estimates	and	assumptions	that	affect	the	reported	amounts	of	assets,	liabilities,
revenues,	costs	and	expenses	and	related	disclosures.	We	base	our	estimates	on	historical	experience,	as	appropriate,	and	on	various	other	assumptions
that	we	believe	to	be	reasonable	under	the	circumstances.	Changes	in	the	accounting	estimates	are	reasonably	likely	to	occur	from	period	to	period.
Accordingly,	actual	results	could	differ	significantly	from	the	estimates	made	by	our	management.	We	evaluate	our	estimates	and	assumptions	on	an
ongoing	basis.	To	the	extent	that	there	are	material	differences	between	these	estimates	and	actual	results,	our	future	financial	statement	presentation,
financial	condition,	results	of	operations	and	cash	flows	may	be	affected.
35The	estimates	used	for,	but	not	limited	to,	determining	significant	economic	incentive	for	resale	value	guarantee	arrangements,	sales	return
reserves,	the	collectability	of	accounts	and	financing	receivables,	inventory	valuation,	warranties,	fair	value	of	long-lived	assets,	goodwill,	fair	value	of
financial	instruments,	fair	value	and	residual	value	of	operating	lease	vehicles	and	solar	energy	systems	subject	to	leases	could	be	impacted.	We	have
assessed	the	impact	and	are	not	aware	of	any	specific	events	or	circumstances	that	required	an	update	to	our	estimates	and	assumptions	or	materially
affected	the	carrying	value	of	our	assets	or	liabilities	as	of	the	date	of	issuance	of	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K.	These	estimates	may	change	as	new
events	occur	and	additional	information	is	obtained.	Actual	results	could	differ	materially	from	these	estimates	under	different	assumptions	or	conditions.
Revenue	Recognition
Automotive	Sales
Automotive	sales	revenue	includes	revenues	related	to	cash	and	financing	deliveries	of	new	vehicles,	and	specific	other	features	and	services	that
meet	the	definition	of	a	performance	obligation	under	Accounting	Standards	Codification	(“ASC”)	606,	
Revenue	from	Contracts	with	Customers	
(“ASC
606”),	including	access	to	our	FSD	Capability	features	and	their	ongoing	maintenance,	internet	connectivity,	free	Supercharging	programs	and	over-the-
air	software	updates.	We	recognize	revenue	on	automotive	sales	upon	delivery	to	the	customer,	which	is	when	the	control	of	a	vehicle	transfers.
Payments	are	typically	received	at	the	point	control	transfers	or	in	accordance	with	payment	terms	customary	to	the	business,	except	sales	we	finance	for
which	payments	are	collected	over	the	contractual	loan	term.	We	also	recognize	a	sales	return	reserve	based	on	historical	experience	plus	consideration
for	expected	future	market	values,	when	we	offer	resale	value	guarantees	or	similar	buyback	terms.	Other	features	and	services	such	as	access	to	our
internet	connectivity,	unlimited	free	Supercharging	and	over-the-air	software	updates	are	provisioned	upon	control	transfer	of	a	vehicle	and	recognized
over	time	on	a	straight-line	basis	as	we	have	a	stand-ready	obligation	to	deliver	such	services	to	the	customer.	Other	limited	free	Supercharging
incentives	are	recognized	based	on	actual	usage	or	expiration,	whichever	is	earlier.	We	recognize	revenue	related	to	these	other	features	and	services
over	the	performance	period,	which	is	generally	the	expected	ownership	life	of	the	vehicle.	Revenue	related	to	FSD	Capability	features	is	recognized	when
functionality	is	delivered	to	the	customer	and	their	ongoing	maintenance	is	recognized	over	time.	For	our	obligations	related	to	automotive	sales,	we
estimate	standalone	selling	price	by	considering	costs	used	to	develop	and	deliver	the	service,	third-party	pricing	of	similar	options	and	other	information
that	may	be	available.
Inventory	Valuation
Inventories	are	stated	at	the	lower	of	cost	or	net	realizable	value.	Cost	is	computed	using	standard	cost	for	vehicles	and	energy	products,	which
approximates	actual	cost	on	a	first-in,	first-out	basis.	We	record	inventory	write-downs	for	excess	or	obsolete	inventories	based	upon	assumptions	about
current	and	future	demand	forecasts.	If	our	inventory	on-hand	is	in	excess	of	our	future	demand	forecast,	the	excess	amounts	are	written-off.
We	also	review	our	inventory	to	determine	whether	its	carrying	value	exceeds	the	net	amount	realizable	upon	the	ultimate	sale	of	the	inventory.
This	requires	us	to	determine	the	estimated	selling	price	of	our	vehicles	less	the	estimated	cost	to	convert	the	inventory	on-hand	into	a	finished	product.
Once	inventory	is	written-down,	a	new,	lower	cost	basis	for	that	inventory	is	established	and	subsequent	changes	in	facts	and	circumstances	do	not	result
in	the	restoration	or	increase	in	that	newly	established	cost	basis.
Should	our	estimates	of	future	selling	prices	or	production	costs	change,	additional	and	potentially	material	write-downs	may	be	required.	A	small
change	in	our	estimates	may	result	in	a	material	charge	to	our	reported	financial	results.
36Warranties
We	provide	a	manufacturer’s	warranty	on	all	new	and	used	vehicles	and	a	warranty	on	the	installation	and	components	of	the	energy	generation
and	storage	systems	we	sell	for	periods	typically	between	10	to	25	years.	We	accrue	a	warranty	reserve	for	the	products	sold	by	us,	which	includes	our
best	estimate	of	the	projected	costs	to	repair	or	replace	items	under	warranties	and	recalls	if	identified.	These	estimates	are	based	on	actual	claims
incurred	to	date	and	an	estimate	of	the	nature,	frequency	and	costs	of	future	claims.	These	estimates	are	inherently	uncertain	and	changes	to	our
historical	or	projected	warranty	experience	may	cause	material	changes	to	the	warranty	reserve	in	the	future.	The	warranty	reserve	does	not	include
projected	warranty	costs	associated	with	our	vehicles	subject	to	operating	lease	accounting	and	our	solar	energy	systems	under	lease	contracts	or	PPAs,
as	the	costs	to	repair	these	warranty	claims	are	expensed	as	incurred.	The	portion	of	the	warranty	reserve	expected	to	be	incurred	within	the	next	12
months	is	included	within	Accrued	liabilities	and	other,	while	the	remaining	balance	is	included	within	Other	long-term	liabilities	on	the	consolidated
balance	sheets.	For	liabilities	that	we	are	entitled	to	receive	indemnification	from	our	suppliers,	we	record	receivables	for	the	contractually	obligated
amounts	on	the	consolidated	balance	sheets	as	a	component	of	Prepaid	expenses	and	other	current	assets	for	the	current	portion	and	as	Other	non-
current	assets	for	the	long-term	portion.	Warranty	expense	is	recorded	as	a	component	of	Cost	of	revenues	in	the	consolidated	statements	of	operations.
Due	to	the	magnitude	of	our	automotive	business,	our	accrued	warranty	balance	is	primarily	related	to	our	automotive	segment.
Stock-Based	Compensation
We	use	the	fair	value	method	of	accounting	for	our	stock	options	and	restricted	stock	units	(“RSUs”)	granted	to	employees	and	for	our	employee
stock	purchase	plan	(the	“ESPP”)	to	measure	the	cost	of	employee	services	received	in	exchange	for	the	stock-based	awards.	The	fair	value	of	stock
option	awards	with	only	service	and/or	performance	conditions	is	estimated	on	the	grant	or	offering	date	using	the	Black-Scholes	option-pricing	model.
The	Black-Scholes	option-pricing	model	requires	inputs	such	as	the	risk-free	interest	rate,	expected	term	and	expected	volatility.	These	inputs	are
subjective	and	generally	require	significant	judgment.	The	fair	value	of	RSUs	is	measured	on	the	grant	date	based	on	the	closing	fair	market	value	of	our
common	stock.	The	resulting	cost	is	recognized	over	the	period	during	which	an	employee	is	required	to	provide	service	in	exchange	for	the	awards,
usually	the	vesting	period,	which	is	generally	four	years	for	stock	options	and	RSUs	and	six	months	for	the	ESPP.	Stock-based	compensation	expense	is
recognized	on	a	straight-line	basis,	net	of	actual	forfeitures	in	the	period.
For	performance-based	awards,	stock-based	compensation	expense	is	recognized	over	the	expected	performance	achievement	period	of	individual
performance	milestones	when	the	achievement	of	each	individual	performance	milestone	becomes	probable.
As	we	accumulate	additional	employee	stock-based	awards	data	over	time	and	as	we	incorporate	market	data	related	to	our	common	stock,	we	may
calculate	significantly	different	volatilities	and	expected	lives,	which	could	materially	impact	the	valuation	of	our	stock-based	awards	and	the	stock-based
compensation	expense	that	we	will	recognize	in	future	periods.	Stock-based	compensation	expense	is	recorded	in	Cost	of	revenues,	Research	and
development	expense	and	Selling,	general	and	administrative	expense	in	the	consolidated	statements	of	operations.
Income	Taxes
We	are	subject	to	income	taxes	in	the	U.S.	and	in	many	foreign	jurisdictions.	Significant	judgment	is	required	in	determining	our	provision	for
income	taxes,	our	deferred	tax	assets	and	liabilities	and	any	valuation	allowance	recorded	against	our	net	deferred	tax	assets	that	are	not	more	likely
than	not	to	be	realized.	We	monitor	the	realizability	of	our	deferred	tax	assets	taking	into	account	all	relevant	factors	at	each	reporting	period.	In
completing	our	assessment	of	realizability	of	our	deferred	tax	assets,	we	consider	our	history	of	income	(loss)	measured	at	pre-tax	income	(loss)	adjusted
for	permanent	book-tax	differences	on	a	jurisdictional	basis,	volatility	in	actual	earnings,	excess	tax	benefits	related	to	stock-based	compensation	in
recent	prior	years,	and	impacts	of	the	timing	of	reversal	of	existing	temporary	differences.	We	also	rely	on	our	assessment	of	the	Company’s	projected
future	results	of	business	operations,	including	uncertainty	in	future	operating	results	relative	to	historical	results,	volatility	in	the	market	price	of	our
common	stock	and	its	performance	over	time,	variable	macroeconomic	conditions	impacting	our	ability	to	forecast	future	taxable	income,	and	changes	in
business	that	may	affect	the	existence	and	magnitude	of	future	taxable	income.	Our	valuation	allowance	assessment	is	based	on	our	best	estimate	of
future	results	considering	all	available	information.
37Furthermore,	significant	judgment	is	required	in	evaluating	our	tax	positions.	In	the	ordinary	course	of	business,	there	are	many	transactions	and
calculations	for	which	the	ultimate	tax	settlement	is	uncertain.	As	a	result,	we	recognize	the	effect	of	this	uncertainty	on	our	tax	attributes	or	taxes
payable	based	on	our	estimates	of	the	eventual	outcome.	These	effects	are	recognized	when,	despite	our	belief	that	our	tax	return	positions	are
supportable,	we	believe	that	it	is	more	likely	than	not	that	some	of	those	positions	may	not	be	fully	sustained	upon	review	by	tax	authorities.	We	are
required	to	file	income	tax	returns	in	the	U.S.	and	various	foreign	jurisdictions,	which	requires	us	to	interpret	the	applicable	tax	laws	and	regulations	in
effect	in	such	jurisdictions.	Such	returns	are	subject	to	audit	by	the	various	federal,	state	and	foreign	taxing	authorities,	who	may	disagree	with	respect	to
our	tax	positions.	We	believe	that	our	consideration	is	adequate	for	all	open	audit	years	based	on	our	assessment	of	many	factors,	including	past
experience	and	interpretations	of	tax	law.	We	review	and	update	our	estimates	in	light	of	changing	facts	and	circumstances,	such	as	the	closing	of	a	tax
audit,	the	lapse	of	a	statute	of	limitations	or	a	change	in	estimate.	To	the	extent	that	the	final	tax	outcome	of	these	matters	differs	from	our	expectations,
such	differences	may	impact	income	tax	expense	in	the	period	in	which	such	determination	is	made.
Results	of	Operations
Revenues
	
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023	vs.	2022	Change
2022	vs.	2021	Change
(Dollars	in	millions)
2023
2022
2021
$
%
$
%
Automotive	sales
$
78,509	
$
67,210	
$
44,125	
$
11,299	
17	
%
$
23,085	
52	
%
Automotive	regulatory	credits
1,790	
1,776	
1,465	
14	
1	
%
311	
21	
%
Automotive	leasing
2,120	
2,476	
1,642	
(356)
(14)
%
834	
51	
%
Total	automotive	revenues
82,419	
71,462	
47,232	
10,957	
15	
%
24,230	
51	
%
Services	and	other
8,319	
6,091	
3,802	
2,228	
37	
%
2,289	
60	
%
Total	automotive	&	services	and	other	segment
revenue
90,738	
77,553	
51,034	
13,185	
17	
%
26,519	
52	
%
Energy	generation	and	storage	segment	revenue
6,035	
3,909	
2,789	
2,126	
54	
%
1,120	
40	
%
Total	revenues
$
96,773	
$
81,462	
$
53,823	
$
15,311	
19	
%
$
27,639	
51	
%
Automotive	&	Services	and	Other	Segment
Automotive	sales	revenue	includes	revenues	related	to	cash	and	financing	deliveries	of	new	Model	S,	Model	X,	Semi,	Model	3,	Model	Y,	and
Cybertruck	vehicles,	including	access	to	our	FSD	Capability	features	and	their	ongoing	maintenance,	internet	connectivity,	free	Supercharging	programs
and	over-the-air	software	updates.	These	deliveries	are	vehicles	that	are	not	subject	to	lease	accounting.
Automotive	regulatory	credits	includes	sales	of	regulatory	credits	to	other	automotive	manufacturers.	Our	revenue	from	automotive	regulatory
credits	is	directly	related	to	our	new	vehicle	production,	sales	and	pricing	negotiated	with	our	customers.	We	monetize	them	proactively	as	new	vehicles
are	sold	based	on	standing	arrangements	with	buyers	of	such	credits,	typically	as	close	as	possible	to	the	production	and	delivery	of	the	vehicle	or
changes	in	regulation	impacting	the	credits.
Automotive	leasing	revenue	includes	the	amortization	of	revenue	for	vehicles	under	direct	operating	lease	agreements.	Additionally,	automotive
leasing	revenue	includes	direct	sales-type	leasing	programs	where	we	recognize	all	revenue	associated	with	the	sales-type	lease	upon	delivery	to	the
customer.
Services	and	other	revenue	consists	of	sales	of	used	vehicles,	non-warranty	after-sales	vehicle	services,	body	shop	and	parts,	paid	Supercharging,
vehicle	insurance	revenue	and	retail	merchandise.
2023	compared	to	2022
Automotive	sales	revenue	increased	$11.30	billion,	or	17%,	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year	ended	December	31,
2022,	primarily	due	to	an	increase	of	473,382	combined	Model	3	and	Model	Y	cash	deliveries	from	production	ramping	of	Model	Y	globally.	The	increase
was	partially	offset	by	a	lower	average	selling	price	on	our	vehicles	driven	by	overall	price	reductions	year	over	year,	sales	mix,	and	a	negative	impact
from	the	United	States	dollar	strengthening	against	other	foreign	currencies	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	compared	to	the	prior	year.
Automotive	regulatory	credits	revenue	increased	$14	million,	or	1%,	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year	ended
December	31,	2022.
38Automotive	leasing	revenue	decreased	$356	million,	or	14%,	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year	ended	December	31,
2022.	The	decrease	was	primarily	due	to	a	decrease	in	direct	sales-type	leasing	revenue	driven	by	lower	deliveries	year	over	year,	partially	offset	by	an
increase	from	our	growing	direct	operating	lease	portfolio.
Services	and	other	revenue	increased	$2.23	billion,	or	37%,	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year	ended	December	31,
2022.	The	increase	was	primarily	due	to	higher	used	vehicle	revenue	driven	by	increases	in	volume,	body	shop	and	part	sales	revenue,	non-warranty
maintenance	services	revenue,	paid	Supercharging	revenue	and	insurance	services	revenue,	all	of	which	are	primarily	attributable	to	our	growing	fleet.
The	increases	were	partially	offset	by	a	decrease	in	the	average	selling	price	of	used	vehicles.
Energy	Generation	and	Storage	Segment
Energy	generation	and	storage	revenue	includes	sales	and	leasing	of	solar	energy	generation	and	energy	storage	products,	financing	of	solar	energy
generation	products,	services	related	to	such	products	and	sales	of	solar	energy	systems	incentives.
2023	compared	to	2022
Energy	generation	and	storage	revenue	increased	$2.13	billion,	or	54%,	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year	ended
December	31,	2022.	The	increase	was	primarily	due	to	an	increase	in	deployments	of	Megapack.
Cost	of	Revenues	and	Gross	Margin
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023	vs.	2022	Change
2022	vs.	2021	Change
(Dollars	in	millions)
2023
2022
2021
$
%
$
%
Cost	of	revenues
Automotive	sales
$
65,121	
$
49,599	
$
32,415	
$
15,522	
31	
%
$
17,184	
53	
%
Automotive	leasing
1,268	
1,509	
978	
(241)
(16)
%
531	
54	
%
Total	automotive	cost	of	revenues
66,389	
51,108	
33,393	
15,281	
30	
%
17,715	
53	
%
Services	and	other
7,830	
5,880	
3,906	
1,950	
33	
%
1,974	
51	
%
Total	automotive	&	services	and	other	segment
cost	of	revenues
74,219	
56,988	
37,299	
17,231	
30	
%
19,689	
53	
%
Energy	generation	and	storage	segment
4,894	
3,621	
2,918	
1,273	
35	
%
703	
24	
%
Total	cost	of	revenues
$
79,113	
$
60,609	
$
40,217	
$
18,504	
31	
%
$
20,392	
51	
%
Gross	profit	total	automotive
$
16,030	
$
20,354	
$
13,839	
Gross	margin	total	automotive
19.4	
%
28.5	
%
29.3	
%
Gross	profit	total	automotive	&	services	and	other
segment
$
16,519	
$
20,565	
$
13,735	
Gross	margin	total	automotive	&	services	and	other
segment
18.2	
%
26.5	
%
26.9	
%
Gross	profit	energy	generation	and	storage	segment
$
1,141	
$
288	
$
(129)
Gross	margin	energy	generation	and	storage	segment
18.9	
%
7.4	
%
(4.6)
%
Total	gross	profit
$
17,660	
$
20,853	
$
13,606	
Total	gross	margin
18.2	
%
25.6	
%
25.3	
%
39Automotive	&	Services	and	Other	Segment
Cost	of	automotive	sales	revenue	includes	direct	and	indirect	materials,	labor	costs,	manufacturing	overhead,	including	depreciation	costs	of	tooling
and	machinery,	shipping	and	logistic	costs,	vehicle	connectivity	costs,	FSD	ongoing	maintenance	costs,	allocations	of	electricity	and	infrastructure	costs
related	to	our	Supercharger	network	and	reserves	for	estimated	warranty	expenses.	Cost	of	automotive	sales	revenues	also	includes	adjustments	to
warranty	expense	and	charges	to	write	down	the	carrying	value	of	our	inventory	when	it	exceeds	its	estimated	net	realizable	value	and	to	provide	for
obsolete	and	on-hand	inventory	in	excess	of	forecasted	demand.	Additionally,	cost	of	automotive	sales	revenue	benefits	from	manufacturing	credits
earned.
Cost	of	automotive	leasing	revenue	includes	the	depreciation	of	operating	lease	vehicles,	cost	of	goods	sold	associated	with	direct	sales-type	leases
and	warranty	expense	related	to	leased	vehicles.
Costs	of	services	and	other	revenue	includes	cost	of	used	vehicles	including	refurbishment	costs,	costs	associated	with	providing	non-warranty
after-sales	services,	costs	associated	with	our	body	shops	and	part	sales,	costs	of	paid	Supercharging,	costs	to	provide	vehicle	insurance	and	costs	for
retail	merchandise.
2023	compared	to	2022
Cost	of	automotive	sales	revenue	increased	$15.52	billion,	or	31%,	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year	ended
December	31,	2022.	Cost	of	automotive	sales	revenue	increased	in	line	with	the	change	in	deliveries	year	over	year,	as	discussed	above.	The	increase
was	partially	offset	by	a	decrease	in	the	average	combined	cost	per	unit	of	our	vehicles	primarily	due	to	sales	mix,	lower	inbound	freight,	a	decrease	in
material	costs	and	lower	manufacturing	costs	from	better	fixed	cost	absorption.	Our	costs	of	revenue	were	also	positively	impacted	by	the	United	States
dollar	strengthening	against	our	foreign	currencies	as	compared	to	the	prior	periods	and	by	the	IRA	manufacturing	credits	earned	during	the	current	year.
Cost	of	automotive	leasing	revenue	decreased	$241	million,	or	16%,	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year	ended
December	31,	2022.	The	decrease	was	primarily	due	to	a	decrease	in	direct	sales-type	leasing	cost	of	revenue	driven	by	lower	deliveries	year	over	year.
Cost	of	services	and	other	revenue	increased	$1.95	billion,	or	33%,	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year	ended
December	31,	2022.	The	increase	was	generally	in	line	with	the	changes	in	services	and	other	revenue	as	discussed	above.
Gross	margin	for	total	automotive	decreased	from	28.5%	to	19.4%	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year	ended
December	31,	2022.	The	decrease	was	primarily	due	to	a	lower	average	selling	price	on	our	vehicles	partially	offset	by	the	favorable	change	in	our
average	combined	cost	per	unit	of	our	vehicles	and	IRA	manufacturing	credits	earned	as	discussed	above.
Gross	margin	for	total	automotive	&	services	and	other	segment	decreased	from	26.5%	to	18.2%	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as
compared	to	the	year	ended	December	31,	2022,	primarily	due	to	the	automotive	gross	margin	decrease	discussed	above.
Energy	Generation	and	Storage	Segment
Cost	of	energy	generation	and	storage	revenue	includes	direct	and	indirect	material	and	labor	costs,	warehouse	rent,	freight,	warranty	expense,
other	overhead	costs	and	amortization	of	certain	acquired	intangible	assets.	Cost	of	energy	generation	and	storage	revenue	also	includes	charges	to	write
down	the	carrying	value	of	our	inventory	when	it	exceeds	its	estimated	net	realizable	value	and	to	provide	for	obsolete	and	on-hand	inventory	in	excess
of	forecasted	demand.	Additionally,	cost	of	energy	generation	and	storage	revenue	benefits	from	manufacturing	credits	earned.	In	agreements	for	solar
energy	systems	and	PPAs	where	we	are	the	lessor,	the	cost	of	revenue	is	primarily	comprised	of	depreciation	of	the	cost	of	leased	solar	energy	systems,
maintenance	costs	associated	with	those	systems	and	amortization	of	any	initial	direct	costs.
2023	compared	to	2022
Cost	of	energy	generation	and	storage	revenue	increased	$1.27	billion,	or	35%,	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year
ended	December	31,	2022,	in	line	with	the	increase	in	Megapack	deployments	year	over	year,	as	discussed	above.	This	increase	was	partially	offset	by	an
improvement	in	production	ramping	that	drove	down	the	average	cost	per	MWh	of	Megapack	as	well	as	IRA	manufacturing	credits	earned	during	the
current	year.
40Gross	margin	for	energy	generation	and	storage	increased	from	7.4%	to	18.9%	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year
ended	December	31,	2022.	The	increase	was	driven	by	an	improvement	in	our	Megapack	gross	margin	from	lower	average	cost	per	MWh	and	a	higher
proportion	of	Megapack,	which	operated	at	a	higher	gross	margin,	within	the	segment	as	compared	to	the	prior	year	periods.	Additionally,	there	was	a
margin	benefit	from	IRA	manufacturing	credits	earned.
Research	and	Development	Expense
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023	vs.	2022	Change
2022	vs.	2021	Change
(Dollars	in	millions)
2023
2022
2021
$
%
$
%
Research	and	development
$
3,969	
$
3,075	
$
2,593	
$
894	
29	
%
$
482	
19	
%
As	a	percentage	of	revenues
4	
%
4	
%
5	
%
Research	and	development	(“R&D”)	expenses	consist	primarily	of	personnel	costs	for	our	teams	in	engineering	and	research,	manufacturing
engineering	and	manufacturing	test	organizations,	prototyping	expense,	contract	and	professional	services	and	amortized	equipment	expense.
R&D	expenses	increased	$894	million,	or	29%,	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year	ended	December	31,	2022.	The
overall	increase	was	primarily	driven	by	additional	costs	in	the	current	year	related	to	the	pre-production	phase	for	Cybertruck,	AI	and	other	programs.
R&D	expenses	as	a	percentage	of	revenue	stayed	consistent	at	4%	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year	ended
December	31,	2022.	Our	R&D	expenses	have	increased	proportionately	with	total	revenues	as	we	continue	to	expand	our	product	roadmap	and
technologies.
Selling,	General	and	Administrative	Expense
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023	vs.	2022	Change
2022	vs.	2021	Change
(Dollars	in	millions)
2023
2022
2021
$
%
$
%
Selling,	general	and	administrative
$
4,800	
$
3,946	
$
4,517	
$
854	
22	
%
$
(571)
(13)
%
As	a	percentage	of	revenues
5	
%
5	
%
8	
%
Selling,	general	and	administrative	(“SG&A”)	expenses	generally	consist	of	personnel	and	facilities	costs	related	to	our	stores,	marketing,	sales,
executive,	finance,	human	resources,	information	technology	and	legal	organizations,	as	well	as	fees	for	professional	and	contract	services	and	litigation
settlements.
SG&A	expenses	increased	$854	million,	or	22%,	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year	ended	December	31,	2022.	This	was
driven	by	a	$447	million	increase	in	employee	and	labor	costs	primarily	from	increased	headcount,	including	professional	services	and	a	$363	million
increase	in	facilities	related	expenses.
Restructuring	and	Other
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023	vs.	2022	Change
2022	vs.	2021	Change
(Dollars	in	millions)
2023
2022
2021
$
%
$
%
Restructuring	and	other
$
—	
$
176	
$
(27)
$
(176)
(100)%
$
203	
Not	meaningful
During	the	year	ended	December	31,	2022,	we	recorded	an	impairment	loss	of	$204	million	as	well	as	realized	gains	of	$64	million	in	connection
with	converting	our	holdings	of	digital	assets	into	fiat	currency.	We	also	recorded	other	expenses	of	$36	million	during	the	second	quarter	of	the	year
ended	December	31,	2022,	related	to	employee	terminations.
Interest	Income
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023	vs.	2022	Change
2022	vs.	2021	Change
(Dollars	in	millions)
2023
2022
2021
$
%
$
%
Interest	income
$
1,066	
$
297	
$
56	
$
769	
259	
%
$
241	
430	
%
41Interest	income	increased	$769	million,	or	259%,	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year	ended	December	31,	2022.	This
increase	was	primarily	due	to	higher	interest	earned	on	our	cash	and	cash	equivalents	and	short-term	investments	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023
as	compared	to	the	prior	year	due	to	rising	interest	rates	and	our	increasing	portfolio	balance.
Other	Income	(Expense),	Net
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023	vs.	2022	Change
2022	vs.	2021	Change
(Dollars	in	millions)
2023
2022
2021
$
%
$
%
Other	income	(expense),	net
$
172	
$
(43)
$
135	
$
215	
Not	meaningful
$
(178)
Not	meaningful
Other	income	(expense),	net,	consists	primarily	of	foreign	exchange	gains	and	losses	related	to	our	foreign	currency-denominated	monetary	assets
and	liabilities.	We	expect	our	foreign	exchange	gains	and	losses	will	vary	depending	upon	movements	in	the	underlying	exchange	rates.
Other	income,	net,	changed	favorably	by	$215	million	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year	ended	December	31,	2022.
The	favorable	change	was	primarily	due	to	fluctuations	in	foreign	currency	exchange	rates	on	our	intercompany	balances.
(Benefit	from)	Provision	for	Income	Taxes
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023	vs.	2022	Change
2022	vs.	2021	Change
(Dollars	in	millions)
2023
2022
2021
$
%
$
%
(Benefit	from)	provision	for	income	taxes
$
(5,001)
$
1,132	
$
699	
$
(6,133)
Not	meaningful
$
433	
62	
%
Effective	tax	rate
(50)
%
8	
%
11	
%
We	monitor	the	realizability	of	our	deferred	tax	assets	taking	into	account	all	relevant	factors	at	each	reporting	period.	As	of	December	31,	2023,
based	on	the	relevant	weight	of	positive	and	negative	evidence,	including	the	amount	of	our	taxable	income	in	recent	years	which	is	objective	and
verifiable,	and	consideration	of	our	expected	future	taxable	earnings,	we	concluded	that	it	is	more	likely	than	not	that	our	U.S.	federal	and	certain	state
deferred	tax	assets	are	realizable.	As	such,	we	released	$6.54	billion	of	our	valuation	allowance	associated	with	the	U.S.	federal	and	state	deferred	tax
assets,	with	the	exception	of	our	California	deferred	tax	assets.	Approximately	$5.93	billion	of	the	total	valuation	allowance	release	was	related	to
deferred	tax	assets	to	be	realized	in	the	future	years	and	the	remainder	benefited	us	during	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023.	We	continue	to	maintain
a	full	valuation	allowance	against	our	California	deferred	tax	assets	as	of	December	31,	2023,	because	we	concluded	they	are	not	more	likely	than	not	to
be	realized	as	we	expect	our	California	deferred	tax	assets	generation	in	future	years	to	exceed	our	ability	to	use	these	deferred	tax	assets.
Our	(benefit	from)	provision	for	income	taxes	changed	by	$6.13	billion	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year	ended
December	31,	2022,	primarily	due	to	the	release	of	$6.54	billion	of	our	valuation	allowance	associated	with	the	U.S.	federal	and	certain	state	deferred	tax
assets.
Our	effective	tax	rate	changed	from	an	expense	of	8%	to	a	benefit	of	50%	in	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	as	compared	to	the	year	ended
December	31,	2022,	primarily	due	to	the	release	of	the	valuation	allowance	regarding	our	U.S.	federal	and	certain	state	deferred	tax	assets.
See	Note	14,	
Income	Taxes
,	to	the	consolidated	financial	statements	included	elsewhere	in	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K	for	further	details.
Liquidity	and	Capital	Resources
We	expect	to	continue	to	generate	net	positive	operating	cash	flow	as	we	have	done	in	the	last	five	fiscal	years.	The	cash	we	generate	from	our	core
operations	enables	us	to	fund	ongoing	operations	and	production,	our	research	and	development	projects	for	new	products	and	technologies	including	our
proprietary	battery	cells,	additional	manufacturing	ramps	at	existing	manufacturing	facilities,	the	construction	of	future	factories,	and	the	continued
expansion	of	our	retail	and	service	locations,	body	shops,	Mobile	Service	fleet,	Supercharger,	including	to	support	NACS,	energy	product	installation
capabilities	and	autonomy	and	other	artificial	intelligence	enabled	products.
42In	addition,	because	a	large	portion	of	our	future	expenditures	will	be	to	fund	our	growth,	we	expect	that	if	needed	we	will	be	able	to	adjust	our
capital	and	operating	expenditures	by	operating	segment.	For	example,	if	our	near-term	manufacturing	operations	decrease	in	scale	or	ramp	more	slowly
than	expected,	including	due	to	global	economic	or	business	conditions,	we	may	choose	to	correspondingly	slow	the	pace	of	our	capital	expenditures.
Finally,	we	continually	evaluate	our	cash	needs	and	may	decide	it	is	best	to	raise	additional	capital	or	seek	alternative	financing	sources	to	fund	the	rapid
growth	of	our	business,	including	through	drawdowns	on	existing	or	new	debt	facilities	or	financing	funds.	Conversely,	we	may	also	from	time	to	time
determine	that	it	is	in	our	best	interests	to	voluntarily	repay	certain	indebtedness	early.
Accordingly,	we	believe	that	our	current	sources	of	funds	will	provide	us	with	adequate	liquidity	during	the	12-month	period	following	December	31,
2023,	as	well	as	in	the	long-term.
See	the	sections	below	for	more	details	regarding	the	material	requirements	for	cash	in	our	business	and	our	sources	of	liquidity	to	meet	such
needs.
Material	Cash	Requirements
From	time	to	time	in	the	ordinary	course	of	business,	we	enter	into	agreements	with	vendors	for	the	purchase	of	components	and	raw	materials	to
be	used	in	the	manufacture	of	our	products.	However,	due	to	contractual	terms,	variability	in	the	precise	growth	curves	of	our	development	and
production	ramps,	and	opportunities	to	renegotiate	pricing,	we	generally	do	not	have	binding	and	enforceable	purchase	orders	under	such	contracts
beyond	the	short-term,	and	the	timing	and	magnitude	of	purchase	orders	beyond	such	period	is	difficult	to	accurately	project.
As	discussed	in	and	subject	to	the	considerations	referenced	in	Part	II,	Item	7,	Management's	Discussion	and	Analysis	of	Financial	Condition	and
Results	of	Operations—Management	Opportunities,	Challenges	and	Uncertainties	and	2023	Outlook—Cash	Flow	and	Capital	Expenditure	Trends	in	this
Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K,	we	currently	expect	our	capital	expenditures	to	support	our	projects	globally	to	exceed	$10.00	billion	in	2024	and	be
between	$8.00	to	$10.00	billion	in	each	of	the	following	two	fiscal	years.	In	connection	with	our	operations	at	Gigafactory	New	York,	we	have	an
agreement	to	spend	or	incur	$5.00	billion	in	combined	capital,	operational	expenses,	costs	of	goods	sold	and	other	costs	in	the	State	of	New	York	through
December	31,	2029	(pursuant	to	a	deferral	of	our	required	timelines	to	meet	such	obligations	that	was	granted	in	April	2021,	and	which	was	memorialized
in	an	amendment	to	our	agreement	with	the	SUNY	Foundation	in	August	2021).	For	details	regarding	these	obligations,	refer	to	Note	15,	
Commitments
and	Contingencies
,	to	the	consolidated	financial	statements	included	elsewhere	in	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K.
As	of	December	31,	2023,	we	and	our	subsidiaries	had	outstanding	$4.68	billion	in	aggregate	principal	amount	of	indebtedness,	of	which	$1.98
billion	is	scheduled	to	become	due	in	the	succeeding	12	months.	As	of	December	31,	2023,	our	total	minimum	lease	payments	was	$5.96	billion,	of	which
$1.31	billion	is	due	in	the	succeeding	12	months.	For	details	regarding	our	indebtedness	and	lease	obligations,	refer	to	Note	11,	
Debt
,	and	Note	12,
Leases
,	to	the	consolidated	financial	statements	included	elsewhere	in	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K.
Sources	and	Conditions	of	Liquidity
Our	sources	to	fund	our	material	cash	requirements	are	predominantly	from	our	deliveries	and	servicing	of	new	and	used	vehicles,	sales	and
installations	of	our	energy	storage	products	and	solar	energy	systems,	proceeds	from	debt	facilities	and	proceeds	from	equity	offerings,	when	applicable.
As	of	December	31,	2023,	we	had	$16.40	billion	and	$12.70	billion	of	cash	and	cash	equivalents	and	short-term	investments,	respectively.	Balances
held	in	foreign	currencies	had	a	U.S.	dollar	equivalent	of	$4.43	billion	and	consisted	primarily	of	Chinese	yuan	and	euros.	We	had	$5.03	billion	of	unused
committed	credit	amounts	as	of	December	31,	2023.	For	details	regarding	our	indebtedness,	refer	to	Note	11,	
Debt
,	to	the	consolidated	financial
statements	included	elsewhere	in	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K.
We	continue	adapting	our	strategy	to	meet	our	liquidity	and	risk	objectives,	such	as	investing	in	U.S.	government	securities	and	other	investments,
to	do	more	vertical	integration,	expand	our	product	roadmap	and	provide	financing	options	to	our	customers.
43Summary	of	Cash	Flows
	
Year	Ended	December	31,
(Dollars	in	millions)
2023
2022
2021
Net	cash	provided	by	operating	activities
$
13,256	
$
14,724	
$
11,497	
Net	cash	used	in	investing	activities
$
(15,584)
$
(11,973)
$
(7,868)
Net	cash	provided	by	(used	in)	financing	activities
$
2,589	
$
(3,527)
$
(5,203)
Cash	Flows	from	Operating	Activities
Our	cash	flows	from	operating	activities	are	significantly	affected	by	our	cash	investments	to	support	the	growth	of	our	business	in	areas	such	as
research	and	development	and	selling,	general	and	administrative	and	working	capital.	Our	operating	cash	inflows	include	cash	from	vehicle	sales	and
related	servicing,	customer	lease	and	financing	payments,	customer	deposits,	cash	from	sales	of	regulatory	credits	and	energy	generation	and	storage
products,	and	interest	income	on	our	cash	and	investments	portfolio.	These	cash	inflows	are	offset	by	our	payments	to	suppliers	for	production	materials
and	parts	used	in	our	manufacturing	process,	operating	expenses,	operating	lease	payments	and	interest	payments	on	our	financings.
Net	cash	provided	by	operating	activities	decreased	by	$1.47	billion	to	$13.26	billion	during	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	from	$14.72	billion
during	the	year	ended	December	31,	2022.	This	decrease	was	primarily	due	to	the	decrease	in	net	income	excluding	non-cash	expenses,	gains	and	losses
of	$2.93	billion,	partially	offset	by	favorable	changes	in	net	operating	assets	and	liabilities	of	$1.46	billion.
Cash	Flows	from	Investing	Activities
Cash	flows	from	investing	activities	and	their	variability	across	each	period	related	primarily	to	capital	expenditures,	which	were	$8.90	billion	for	the
year	ended	December	31,	2023	and	$7.16	billion	for	the	year	ended	December	31,	2022,	mainly	for	global	factory	expansion	and	machinery	and
equipment	as	we	expand	our	product	roadmap.	We	also	purchased	$6.62	billion	and	$5.81	billion	of	investments,	net	of	proceeds	from	maturities	and
sales,	for	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	and	2022,	respectively.	Additionally,	proceeds	from	sales	of	digital	assets	was	$936	million	in	the	year
ended	December	31,	2022.
Cash	Flows	from	Financing	Activities
Net	cash	from	financing	activities	changed	by	$6.12	billion	to	$2.59	billion	net	cash	provided	by	financing	activities	during	the	year	ended
December	31,	2023	from	$3.53	billion	net	cash	used	in	financing	activities	during	the	year	ended	December	31,	2022.	The	change	was	primarily	due	to	a
$3.93	billion	increase	in	proceeds	from	issuances	of	debt	and	a	$2.01	billion	decrease	in	repayments	of	debt.	See	Note	11,	
Debt
,	to	the	consolidated
financial	statements	included	elsewhere	in	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K	for	further	details	regarding	our	debt	obligations.
Recent	Accounting	Pronouncements
See	Note	2,	
Summary	of	Significant	Accounting	Policies
,	to	the	consolidated	financial	statements	included	elsewhere	in	this	Annual	Report	on	Form
10-K.
44ITEM	7A.	QUANTITATIVE	AND	QUALITATIVE	DISCLOSURES	ABOUT	MARKET	RISK
Foreign	Currency	Risk
We	transact	business	globally	in	multiple	currencies	and	hence	have	foreign	currency	risks	related	to	our	revenue,	costs	of	revenue	and	operating
expenses	denominated	in	currencies	other	than	the	U.S.	dollar	(primarily	the	Chinese	yuan	and	euro	in	relation	to	our	current	year	operations).	In	general,
we	are	a	net	receiver	of	currencies	other	than	the	U.S.	dollar	for	our	foreign	subsidiaries.	Accordingly,	changes	in	exchange	rates	affect	our	operating
results	as	expressed	in	U.S.	dollars	as	we	do	not	typically	hedge	foreign	currency	risk.
We	have	also	experienced,	and	will	continue	to	experience,	fluctuations	in	our	net	income	as	a	result	of	gains	(losses)	on	the	settlement	and	the	re-
measurement	of	monetary	assets	and	liabilities	denominated	in	currencies	that	are	not	the	local	currency	(primarily	consisting	of	our	intercompany	and
cash	and	cash	equivalents	balances).
We	considered	the	historical	trends	in	foreign	currency	exchange	rates	and	determined	that	it	is	reasonably	possible	that	adverse	changes	in	foreign
currency	exchange	rates	of	10%	for	all	currencies	could	be	experienced	in	the	near-term.	These	changes	were	applied	to	our	total	monetary	assets	and
liabilities	denominated	in	currencies	other	than	our	local	currencies	at	the	balance	sheet	date	to	compute	the	impact	these	changes	would	have	had	on
our	net	income	before	income	taxes.	These	changes	would	have	resulted	in	a	gain	or	loss	of	$1.01	billion	at	December	31,	2023	and	$473	million	at
December	31,	2022,	assuming	no	foreign	currency	hedging.
45ITEM	8.	FINANCIAL	STATEMENTS	AND	SUPPLEMENTARY	DATA
Index	to	Consolidated	Financial	Statements
Page
Report	of	Independent	Registered	Public	Accounting	Firm
	(PCAOB	ID:	
238
)
47
Consolidated	Balance	Sheets
49
Consolidated	Statements	of	Operations
50
Consolidated	Statements	of	Comprehensive	Income
51
Consolidated	Statements	of	Redeemable	Noncontrolling	Interests	and	Equity
52
Consolidated	Statements	of	Cash	Flows
53
Notes	to	Consolidated	Financial	Statements
54
46Report	of	Independent	Registered	Public	Accounting	Firm
To	the
	
Board	of	Directors	and	Stockholders	of	Tesla,	Inc.
Opinions	on	the	Financial	Statements	and	Internal	Control	over	Financial	Reporting
We	have	audited	the	accompanying	consolidated	balance	sheets	of	Tesla,	Inc.	and	its	subsidiaries	(the	“Company”)	as	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022,
and	the	related	consolidated	statements	of	operations,	of	comprehensive	income,	of	redeemable	noncontrolling	interests	and	equity	and	of	cash	flows	for
each	of	the	three	years	in	the	period	ended	December	31,	2023,	including	the	related	notes	(collectively	referred	to	as	the	“consolidated	financial
statements”).	We	also	have	audited	the	Company's	internal	control	over	financial	reporting	as	of	December	31,	2023,	based	on	criteria	established	in
Internal	Control	-	Integrated	Framework	(2013)	issued	by	the	Committee	of	Sponsoring	Organizations	of	the	Treadway	Commission	(COSO).
In	our	opinion,	the	consolidated	financial	statements	referred	to	above	present	fairly,	in	all	material	respects,	the	financial	position	of	the	Company	as	of
December	31,	2023	and	2022,	and	the	results	of	its	operations	and	its	cash	flows	for	each	of	the	three	years	in	the	period	ended	December	31,	2023	in
conformity	with	accounting	principles	generally	accepted	in	the	United	States	of	America.	Also	in	our	opinion,	the	Company	maintained,	in	all	material
respects,	effective	internal	control	over	financial	reporting	as	of	December	31,	2023,	based	on	criteria	established	in	Internal	Control	-	Integrated
Framework	(2013)	issued	by	the	COSO.
Changes	in	Accounting	Principles
As	discussed	in	Note	2	to	the	consolidated	financial	statements,	the	Company	changed	the	manner	in	which	it	accounts	for	convertible	debt	in	2021.
Basis	for	Opinions
The	Company's	management	is	responsible	for	these	consolidated	financial	statements,	for	maintaining	effective	internal	control	over	financial	reporting,
and	for	its	assessment	of	the	effectiveness	of	internal	control	over	financial	reporting,	included	in	Management’s	Report	on	Internal	Control	over	Financial
Reporting	appearing	under	Item	9A.	Our	responsibility	is	to	express	opinions	on	the	Company’s	consolidated	financial	statements	and	on	the	Company's
internal	control	over	financial	reporting	based	on	our	audits.	We	are	a	public	accounting	firm	registered	with	the	Public	Company	Accounting	Oversight
Board	(United	States)	(PCAOB)	and	are	required	to	be	independent	with	respect	to	the	Company	in	accordance	with	the	U.S.	federal	securities	laws	and
the	applicable	rules	and	regulations	of	the	Securities	and	Exchange	Commission	and	the	PCAOB.
We	conducted	our	audits	in	accordance	with	the	standards	of	the	PCAOB.	Those	standards	require	that	we	plan	and	perform	the	audits	to	obtain
reasonable	assurance	about	whether	the	consolidated	financial	statements	are	free	of	material	misstatement,	whether	due	to	error	or	fraud,	and	whether
effective	internal	control	over	financial	reporting	was	maintained	in	all	material	respects.
Our	audits	of	the	consolidated	financial	statements	included	performing	procedures	to	assess	the	risks	of	material	misstatement	of	the	consolidated
financial	statements,	whether	due	to	error	or	fraud,	and	performing	procedures	that	respond	to	those	risks.	Such	procedures	included	examining,	on	a
test	basis,	evidence	regarding	the	amounts	and	disclosures	in	the	consolidated	financial	statements.	Our	audits	also	included	evaluating	the	accounting
principles	used	and	significant	estimates	made	by	management,	as	well	as	evaluating	the	overall	presentation	of	the	consolidated	financial	statements.
Our	audit	of	internal	control	over	financial	reporting	included	obtaining	an	understanding	of	internal	control	over	financial	reporting,	assessing	the	risk
that	a	material	weakness	exists,	and	testing	and	evaluating	the	design	and	operating	effectiveness	of	internal	control	based	on	the	assessed	risk.	Our
audits	also	included	performing	such	other	procedures	as	we	considered	necessary	in	the	circumstances.	We	believe	that	our	audits	provide	a	reasonable
basis	for	our	opinions.
47Definition	and	Limitations	of	Internal	Control	over	Financial	Reporting
A	company’s	internal	control	over	financial	reporting	is	a	process	designed	to	provide	reasonable	assurance	regarding	the	reliability	of	financial	reporting
and	the	preparation	of	financial	statements	for	external	purposes	in	accordance	with	generally	accepted	accounting	principles.	A	company’s	internal
control	over	financial	reporting	includes	those	policies	and	procedures	that	(i)	pertain	to	the	maintenance	of	records	that,	in	reasonable	detail,	accurately
and	fairly	reflect	the	transactions	and	dispositions	of	the	assets	of	the	company;	(ii)	provide	reasonable	assurance	that	transactions	are	recorded	as
necessary	to	permit	preparation	of	financial	statements	in	accordance	with	generally	accepted	accounting	principles,	and	that	receipts	and	expenditures
of	the	company	are	being	made	only	in	accordance	with	authorizations	of	management	and	directors	of	the	company;	and	(iii)	provide	reasonable
assurance	regarding	prevention	or	timely	detection	of	unauthorized	acquisition,	use,	or	disposition	of	the	company’s	assets	that	could	have	a	material
effect	on	the	financial	statements.
Because	of	its	inherent	limitations,	internal	control	over	financial	reporting	may	not	prevent	or	detect	misstatements.	Also,	projections	of	any	evaluation
of	effectiveness	to	future	periods	are	subject	to	the	risk	that	controls	may	become	inadequate	because	of	changes	in	conditions,	or	that	the	degree	of
compliance	with	the	policies	or	procedures	may	deteriorate.
Critical	Audit	Matters
The	critical	audit	matter	communicated	below	is	a	matter	arising	from	the	current	period	audit	of	the	consolidated	financial	statements	that	was
communicated	or	required	to	be	communicated	to	the	audit	committee	and	that	(i)	relates	to	accounts	or	disclosures	that	are	material	to	the	consolidated
financial	statements	and	(ii)	involved	our	especially	challenging,	subjective,	or	complex	judgments.	The	communication	of	critical	audit	matters	does	not
alter	in	any	way	our	opinion	on	the	consolidated	financial	statements,	taken	as	a	whole,	and	we	are	not,	by	communicating	the	critical	audit	matter	below,
providing	a	separate	opinion	on	the	critical	audit	matter	or	on	the	accounts	or	disclosures	to	which	it	relates.
Automotive	Warranty	Reserve
As	described	in	Note	2	to	the	consolidated	financial	statements,	total	accrued	warranty,	which	primarily	relates	to	the	automotive	segment,	was	$5,152
million	as	of	December	31,	2023.	The	Company	provides	a	manufacturer’s	warranty	on	all	new	and	used	Tesla	vehicles.	A	warranty	reserve	is	accrued	for
these	products	sold,	which	includes	management’s	best	estimate	of	the	projected	costs	to	repair	or	replace	items	under	warranty	and	recalls	if	identified.
These	estimates	are	based	on	actual	claims	incurred	to	date	and	an	estimate	of	the	nature,	frequency	and	costs	of	future	claims.
The	principal	considerations	for	our	determination	that	performing	procedures	relating	to	the	automotive	warranty	reserve	is	a	critical	audit	matter	are
the	significant	judgment	by	management	in	determining	the	automotive	warranty	reserve	for	certain	Tesla	vehicle	models;	this	in	turn	led	to	significant
auditor	judgment,	subjectivity,	and	effort	in	performing	procedures	to	evaluate	management’s	significant	assumptions	related	to	the	nature,	frequency
and	costs	of	future	claims	for	certain	Tesla	vehicle	models,	and	the	audit	effort	involved	the	use	of	professionals	with	specialized	skill	and	knowledge.
Addressing	the	matter	involved	performing	procedures	and	evaluating	audit	evidence	in	connection	with	forming	our	overall	opinion	on	the	consolidated
financial	statements.	These	procedures	included	testing	the	effectiveness	of	controls	relating	to	management’s	estimate	of	the	automotive	warranty
reserve	for	certain	Tesla	vehicle	models,	including	controls	over	management’s	significant	assumptions	related	to	the	nature,	frequency	and	costs	of
future	claims	as	well	as	the	completeness	and	accuracy	of	actual	claims	incurred	to	date.	These	procedures	also	included,	among	others,	performing	one
of	the	following:	(i)	testing	management’s	process	for	determining	the	automotive	warranty	reserve	for	certain	Tesla	vehicle	models	or	(ii)	developing	an
independent	estimate	of	the	automotive	warranty	reserve	for	certain	Tesla	vehicle	models	and	comparing	the	independent	estimate	to	management’s
estimate	to	evaluate	the	reasonableness	of	the	estimate.	Testing	management’s	process	involved	evaluating	the	reasonableness	of	significant
assumptions	related	to	the	nature	and	frequency	of	future	claims	and	the	related	costs	to	repair	or	replace	items	under	warranty.	Evaluating	the
assumptions	related	to	the	nature	and	frequency	of	future	claims	and	the	related	costs	to	repair	or	replace	items	under	warranty	involved	evaluating
whether	the	assumptions	used	were	reasonable	by	performing	a	lookback	analysis	comparing	prior	period	forecasted	claims	to	actual	claims	incurred.
Developing	the	independent	estimate	involved	testing	the	completeness	and	accuracy	of	historical	vehicle	claims	processed	and	testing	that	such	claims
were	appropriately	used	by	management	in	the	estimation	of	future	claims.	Professionals	with	specialized	skill	and	knowledge	were	used	to	assist	in
developing	an	independent	estimate	of	the	automotive	warranty	reserve	for	certain	Tesla	vehicle	models	and	in	evaluating	the	appropriateness	of	certain
aspects	of	management’s	significant	assumptions	related	to	the	nature	and	frequency	of	future	claims.
/s/	
PricewaterhouseCoopers	LLP
San	Jose,	California
January	26,	2024
We	have	served	as	the	Company’s	auditor	since	2005.
48Tesla,	Inc.
Consolidated	Balance	Sheets
(in	millions,	except	per	share	data)
December	31,
2023
December	31,
2022
Assets
Current	assets
Cash	and	cash	equivalents
$
16,398
	
$
16,253
	
Short-term	investments
12,696
	
5,932
	
Accounts	receivable,	net
3,508
	
2,952
	
Inventory
13,626
	
12,839
	
Prepaid	expenses	and	other	current	assets
3,388
	
2,941
	
Total	current	assets
49,616
	
40,917
	
Operating	lease	vehicles,	net
5,989
	
5,035
	
Solar	energy	systems,	net
5,229
	
5,489
	
Property,	plant	and	equipment,	net
29,725
	
23,548
	
Operating	lease	right-of-use	assets
4,180
	
2,563
	
Digital	assets,	net
184
	
184
	
Intangible	assets,	net
178
	
215
	
Goodwill
253
	
194
	
Deferred	tax	assets
6,733
	
328
	
Other	non-current	assets
4,531
	
3,865
	
Total	assets
$
106,618
	
$
82,338
	
Liabilities
Current	liabilities
Accounts	payable
$
14,431
	
$
15,255
	
Accrued	liabilities	and	other
9,080
	
8,205
	
Deferred	revenue
2,864
	
1,747
	
Current	portion	of	debt	and	finance	leases
2,373
	
1,502
	
Total	current	liabilities
28,748
	
26,709
	
Debt	and	finance	leases,	net	of	current	portion
2,857
	
1,597
	
Deferred	revenue,	net	of	current	portion
3,251
	
2,804
	
Other	long-term	liabilities
8,153
	
5,330
	
Total	liabilities
43,009
	
36,440
	
Commitments	and	contingencies	(Note	15)
Redeemable	noncontrolling	interests	in	subsidiaries
242
	
409
	
Equity
Stockholders’	equity
Preferred	stock;	$
0.001
	par	value;	
100
	shares	authorized;	
no
	shares	issued	and	outstanding
—
	
—
	
Common	stock;	$
0.001
	par	value;	
6,000
	shares	authorized;	
3,185
	and	
3,164
	shares	issued	and	outstanding	as	of
December	31,	2023	and	2022,	respectively
3
	
3
	
Additional	paid-in	capital
34,892
	
32,177
	
Accumulated	other	comprehensive	loss
(
143
)
(
361
)
Retained	earnings
27,882
	
12,885
	
Total	stockholders’	equity
62,634
	
44,704
	
Noncontrolling	interests	in	subsidiaries
733
	
785
	
Total	liabilities	and	equity
$
106,618
	
$
82,338
	
The	accompanying	notes	are	an	integral	part	of	these	consolidated	financial	statements.
49Tesla,	Inc.
Consolidated	Statements	of	Operations
(in	millions,	except	per	share	data)
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
2021
Revenues
Automotive	sales
$
78,509
	
$
67,210
	
$
44,125
	
Automotive	regulatory	credits
1,790
	
1,776
	
1,465
	
Automotive	leasing
2,120
	
2,476
	
1,642
	
Total	automotive	revenues
82,419
	
71,462
	
47,232
	
Energy	generation	and	storage
6,035
	
3,909
	
2,789
	
Services	and	other
8,319
	
6,091
	
3,802
	
Total	revenues
96,773
	
81,462
	
53,823
	
Cost	of	revenues
Automotive	sales
65,121
	
49,599
	
32,415
	
Automotive	leasing
1,268
	
1,509
	
978
	
Total	automotive	cost	of	revenues
66,389
	
51,108
	
33,393
	
Energy	generation	and	storage
4,894
	
3,621
	
2,918
	
Services	and	other
7,830
	
5,880
	
3,906
	
Total	cost	of	revenues
79,113
	
60,609
	
40,217
	
Gross	profit
17,660
	
20,853
	
13,606
	
Operating	expenses
Research	and	development
3,969
	
3,075
	
2,593
	
Selling,	general	and	administrative
4,800
	
3,946
	
4,517
	
Restructuring	and	other
—
	
176
	
(
27
)
Total	operating	expenses
8,769
	
7,197
	
7,083
	
Income	from	operations
8,891
	
13,656
	
6,523
	
Interest	income
1,066
	
297
	
56
	
Interest	expense
(
156
)
(
191
)
(
371
)
Other	income	(expense),	net
172
	
(
43
)
135
	
Income	before	income	taxes
9,973
	
13,719
	
6,343
	
(Benefit	from)	provision	for	income	taxes
(
5,001
)
1,132
	
699
	
Net	income
14,974
	
12,587
	
5,644
	
Net	(loss)	income	attributable	to	noncontrolling	interests	and	redeemable	noncontrolling	interests
in	subsidiaries
(
23
)
31
	
125
	
Net	income	attributable	to	common	stockholders
$
14,997
	
$
12,556
	
$
5,519
	
	
Net	income	per	share	of	common	stock	attributable	to	common	stockholders
Basic
$
4.73
	
$
4.02
	
$
1.87
	
Diluted
$
4.30
	
$
3.62
	
$
1.63
	
Weighted	average	shares	used	in	computing	net	income	per	share	of	common	stock
Basic
3,174
3,130
2,959
Diluted
3,485
3,475
3,386
The	accompanying	notes	are	an	integral	part	of	these	consolidated	financial	statements.
50Tesla,	Inc.
Consolidated	Statements	of	Comprehensive	Income
(in	millions)
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
2021
Net	income
$
14,974
	
$
12,587
	
$
5,644
	
Other	comprehensive	income	(loss):
Foreign	currency	translation	adjustment
198
	
(
392
)
(
308
)
Unrealized	net	gain	(loss)	on	investments
16
	
(
23
)
(
1
)
Adjustment	for	net	loss	realized	and	included	in	net	income				
4
	
—
	
—
	
Comprehensive	income
15,192
	
12,172
	
5,335
	
Less:	Comprehensive	(loss)	income	attributable	to	noncontrolling	interests	and
redeemable	noncontrolling	interests	in	subsidiaries
(
23
)
31
	
125
	
Comprehensive	income	attributable	to	common	stockholders
$
15,215
	
$
12,141
	
$
5,210
	
The	accompanying	notes	are	an	integral	part	of	these	consolidated	financial	statements.
51Tesla,	Inc.
Consolidated	Statements	of	Redeemable	Noncontrolling	Interests	and	Equity
(in	millions)
Redeemable
Noncontrolling
Interests
Common	Stock
Additional
Paid-In
Capital
Accumulated
Other
Comprehensive
Income	(Loss)
(Accumulated
Deficit)
Retained
Earnings
Total
Stockholders’
Equity
Noncontrolling
Interests	in
Subsidiaries
Total
Equity
Shares
Amount
Balance	as	of	December	31,	2020
$
604
	
2,879
$
3
	
$
27,260
	
$
363
	
$
(
5,401
)
$
22,225
	
$
850
	
$
23,075
	
Adjustments	for	prior	periods	from	adopting	ASU	2020-06
—	
—
—	
(
474
)
—	
211
	
(
263
)
—	
(
263
)
Exercises	of	conversion	feature	of	convertible	senior	notes
—	
2
—	
6
	
—	
—	
6
	
—	
6
	
Settlements	of	warrants
—	
112
—	
—	
—	
—	
—	
—	
—
	
Issuance	of	common	stock	for	equity	incentive	awards
—	
107
—	
707
	
—	
—	
707
	
—	
707
	
Stock-based	compensation
—	
—
—	
2,299
	
—	
—	
2,299
	
—	
2,299
	
Contributions	from	noncontrolling	interests
2
	
—
—	
—	
—	
—	
—	
—	
—
	
Distributions	to	noncontrolling	interests
(
66
)
—
—	
—	
—	
—	
—	
(
106
)
(
106
)
Buy-outs	of	noncontrolling	interests
(
15
)
—
—	
5
	
—	
—	
5
	
—	
5
	
Net	income
43
	
—
—	
—	
—	
5,519
	
5,519
	
82
	
5,601
	
Other	comprehensive	loss
—	
—
—	
—	
(
309
)
—	
(
309
)
—	
(
309
)
Balance	as	of	December	31,	2021
$
568
	
3,100
$
3
	
$
29,803
	
$
54
	
$
329
	
$
30,189
	
$
826
	
$
31,015
	
Settlements	of	warrants
—	
37
—	
—	
—	
—	
—	
—	
—
	
Issuance	of	common	stock	for	equity	incentive	awards
—	
27
—	
541
	
—	
—	
541
	
—	
541
	
Stock-based	compensation
—	
—
—	
1,806
	
—	
—	
1,806
	
—	
1,806
	
Distributions	to	noncontrolling	interests
(
46
)
—
—	
—	
—	
—	
—	
(
113
)
(
113
)
Buy-outs	of	noncontrolling	interests
(
11
)
—
—	
27
	
—	
—	
27
	
(
61
)
(
34
)
Net	(loss)	income
(
102
)
—
—	
—	
—	
12,556
	
12,556
	
133
	
12,689
	
Other	comprehensive	loss
—	
—
—	
—	
(
415
)
—	
(
415
)
—	
(
415
)
Balance	as	of	December	31,	2022
$
409
	
3,164
$
3
	
$
32,177
	
$
(
361
)
$
12,885
	
$
44,704
	
$
785
	
$
45,489
	
Issuance	of	common	stock	for	equity	incentive	awards
—	
21
—	
700
	
—	
—	
700
	
—	
700
	
Stock-based	compensation
—	
—
—	
2,013
	
—	
—	
2,013
	
—	
2,013
	
Distributions	to	noncontrolling	interests
(
32
)
—
—	
—	
—	
—	
—	
(
108
)
(
108
)
Buy-outs	of	noncontrolling	interests
(
39
)
—
—	
2
	
—	
—	
2
	
(
17
)
(
15
)
Net	(loss)	income
(
96
)
—
—	
—	
—	
14,997
	
14,997
	
73
	
15,070
	
Other	comprehensive	income
—	
—
—	
—	
218
	
—	
218
	
—	
218
	
Balance	as	of	December	31,	2023
$
242
	
3,185
$
3
	
$
34,892
	
$
(
143
)
$
27,882
	
$
62,634
	
$
733
	
$
63,367
	
The	accompanying	notes	are	an	integral	part	of	these	consolidated	financial	statements.
52Tesla,	Inc.
Consolidated	Statements	of	Cash	Flows
(in	millions)
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
2021
Cash	Flows	from	Operating	Activities
Net	income
$
14,974
	
$
12,587
	
$
5,644
	
Adjustments	to	reconcile	net	income	to	net	cash	provided	by	operating	activities:
Depreciation,	amortization	and	impairment
4,667
	
3,747
	
2,911
	
Stock-based	compensation
1,812
	
1,560
	
2,121
	
Inventory	and	purchase	commitments	write-downs
463
	
177
	
140
	
Foreign	currency	transaction	net	unrealized	(gain)	loss
(
144
)
81
	
(
55
)
Deferred	income	taxes
(
6,349
)
(
196
)
(
149
)
Non-cash	interest	and	other	operating	activities
81
	
340
	
245
	
Digital	assets	loss	(gain),	net
—
	
140
	
(
27
)
Changes	in	operating	assets	and	liabilities:
Accounts	receivable
(
586
)
(
1,124
)
(
130
)
Inventory
(
1,195
)
(
6,465
)
(
1,709
)
Operating	lease	vehicles
(
1,952
)
(
1,570
)
(
2,114
)
Prepaid	expenses	and	other	assets
(
2,652
)
(
3,713
)
(
1,540
)
Accounts	payable,	accrued	and	other	liabilities
2,605
	
8,029
	
5,367
	
Deferred	revenue
1,532
	
1,131
	
793
	
Net	cash	provided	by	operating	activities
13,256
	
14,724
	
11,497
	
Cash	Flows	from	Investing	Activities
Purchases	of	property	and	equipment	excluding	finance	leases,	net	of	sales
(
8,898
)
(
7,158
)
(
6,482
)
Purchases	of	solar	energy	systems,	net	of	sales
(
1
)
(
5
)
(
32
)
Purchases	of	digital	assets
—
	
—
	
(
1,500
)
Proceeds	from	sales	of	digital	assets
—
	
936
	
272
	
Purchase	of	intangible	assets
—
	
(
9
)
—
	
Purchases	of	investments
(
19,112
)
(
5,835
)
(
132
)
Proceeds	from	maturities	of	investments
12,353
	
22
	
—
	
Proceeds	from	sales	of	investments
138
	
—
	
—
	
Receipt	of	government	grants
—
	
76
	
6
	
Business	combinations,	net	of	cash	acquired
(
64
)
—
	
—
	
Net	cash	used	in	investing	activities
(
15,584
)
(
11,973
)
(
7,868
)
Cash	Flows	from	Financing	Activities
Proceeds	from	issuances	of	debt
3,931
	
—
	
8,883
	
Repayments	of	debt
(
1,351
)
(
3,364
)
(
14,167
)
Collateralized	lease	repayments
—
	
—
	
(
9
)
Proceeds	from	exercises	of	stock	options	and	other	stock	issuances
700
	
541
	
707
	
Principal	payments	on	finance	leases
(
464
)
(
502
)
(
439
)
Debt	issuance	costs
(
29
)
—
	
(
9
)
Proceeds	from	investments	by	noncontrolling	interests	in	subsidiaries
—
	
—
	
2
	
Distributions	paid	to	noncontrolling	interests	in	subsidiaries
(
144
)
(
157
)
(
161
)
Payments	for	buy-outs	of	noncontrolling	interests	in	subsidiaries
(
54
)
(
45
)
(
10
)
Net	cash	provided	by	(used	in)	financing	activities
2,589
	
(
3,527
)
(
5,203
)
Effect	of	exchange	rate	changes	on	cash	and	cash	equivalents	and	restricted	cash
4
	
(
444
)
(
183
)
Net	increase	(decrease)	in	cash	and	cash	equivalents	and	restricted	cash
265
	
(
1,220
)
(
1,757
)
Cash	and	cash	equivalents	and	restricted	cash,	beginning	of	period
16,924
	
18,144
	
19,901
	
Cash	and	cash	equivalents	and	restricted	cash,	end	of	period
$
17,189
	
$
16,924
	
$
18,144
	
Supplemental	Non-Cash	Investing	and	Financing	Activities
Acquisitions	of	property	and	equipment	included	in	liabilities
$
2,272
	
$
2,148
	
$
2,251
	
Supplemental	Disclosures
Cash	paid	during	the	period	for	interest,	net	of	amounts	capitalized
$
126
	
$
152
	
$
266
	
Cash	paid	during	the	period	for	income	taxes,	net	of	refunds
$
1,119
	
$
1,203
	
$
561
	The	accompanying	notes	are	an	integral	part	of	these	consolidated	financial	statements.
53Tesla,	Inc.
Notes	to	Consolidated	Financial	Statements
Note	1	–	
Overview
Tesla,	Inc.	(“Tesla”,	the	“Company”,	“we”,	“us”	or	“our”)	was	incorporated	in	the	State	of	Delaware	on	July	1,	2003.	We	design,	develop,
manufacture,	sell	and	lease	high-performance	fully	electric	vehicles	and	energy	generation	and	storage	systems,	and	offer	services	related	to	our
products.	Our	Chief	Executive	Officer,	as	the	chief	operating	decision	maker	(“CODM”),	organizes	our	company,	manages	resource	allocations	and
measures	performance	among	
two
	operating	and	reportable	segments:	(i)	automotive	and	(ii)	energy	generation	and	storage.
Note	2	–	
Summary	of	Significant	Accounting	Policies
Principles	of	Consolidation
The	accompanying	consolidated	financial	statements	have	been	prepared	in	conformity	with	GAAP	and	reflect	our	accounts	and	operations	and
those	of	our	subsidiaries	in	which	we	have	a	controlling	financial	interest.	In	accordance	with	the	provisions	of	ASC	810,	
Consolidation	
(“ASC	810”),	we
consolidate	any	variable	interest	entity	(“VIE”)	of	which	we	are	the	primary	beneficiary.	We	have	formed	VIEs	with	financing	fund	investors	in	the	ordinary
course	of	business	in	order	to	facilitate	the	funding	and	monetization	of	certain	attributes	associated	with	solar	energy	systems	and	leases	under	our
direct	vehicle	leasing	programs.	The	typical	condition	for	a	controlling	financial	interest	ownership	is	holding	a	majority	of	the	voting	interests	of	an	entity;
however,	a	controlling	financial	interest	may	also	exist	in	entities,	such	as	VIEs,	through	arrangements	that	do	not	involve	controlling	voting	interests.	ASC
810	requires	a	variable	interest	holder	to	consolidate	a	VIE	if	that	party	has	the	power	to	direct	the	activities	of	the	VIE	that	most	significantly	impact	the
VIE’s	economic	performance	and	the	obligation	to	absorb	losses	of	the	VIE	that	could	potentially	be	significant	to	the	VIE	or	the	right	to	receive	benefits
from	the	VIE	that	could	potentially	be	significant	to	the	VIE.	We	do	not	consolidate	a	VIE	in	which	we	have	a	majority	ownership	interest	when	we	are	not
considered	the	primary	beneficiary.	We	have	determined	that	we	are	the	primary	beneficiary	of	all	the	VIEs	(see	Note	16
,	Variable	Interest	Entity
Arrangements
).	We	evaluate	our	relationships	with	all	the	VIEs	on	an	ongoing	basis	to	ensure	that	we	continue	to	be	the	primary	beneficiary.	All
intercompany	transactions	and	balances	have	been	eliminated	upon	consolidation.
Use	of	Estimates
The	preparation	of	financial	statements	in	conformity	with	GAAP	requires	management	to	make	estimates	and	assumptions	that	affect	the	reported
amounts	of	assets,	liabilities,	revenues,	costs	and	expenses	and	related	disclosures	in	the	accompanying	notes.	The	estimates	used	for,	but	not	limited	to,
determining	significant	economic	incentive	for	resale	value	guarantee	arrangements,	sales	return	reserves,	income	taxes,	the	collectability	of	accounts
and	finance	receivables,	inventory	valuation,	warranties,	fair	value	of	long-lived	assets,	goodwill,	fair	value	of	financial	instruments,	fair	value	and	residual
value	of	operating	lease	vehicles	and	solar	energy	systems	subject	to	leases	could	be	impacted.	We	have	assessed	the	impact	and	are	not	aware	of	any
specific	events	or	circumstances	that	required	an	update	to	our	estimates	and	assumptions	or	materially	affected	the	carrying	value	of	our	assets	or
liabilities	as	of	the	date	of	issuance	of	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K.	These	estimates	may	change	as	new	events	occur	and	additional	information	is
obtained.	Actual	results	could	differ	materially	from	these	estimates	under	different	assumptions	or	conditions.
Reclassifications
Certain	prior	period	balances	have	been	reclassified	to	conform	to	the	current	period	presentation	in	the	consolidated	financial	statements	and	the
accompanying	notes.
54Revenue	Recognition
Revenue	by	source
The	following	table	disaggregates	our	revenue	by	major	source	(in	millions):
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
2021
Automotive	sales
$
78,509
	
$
67,210
	
$
44,125
	
Automotive	regulatory	credits
1,790
	
1,776
	
1,465
	
Energy	generation	and	storage	sales
5,515
	
3,376
	
2,279
	
Services	and	other
8,319
	
6,091
	
3,802
	
Total	revenues	from	sales	and	services
94,133
	
78,453
	
51,671
	
Automotive	leasing
2,120
	
2,476
	
1,642
	
Energy	generation	and	storage	leasing
520
	
533
	
510
	
Total	revenues
$
96,773
	
$
81,462
	
$
53,823
	
Automotive	Segment
Automotive	Sales
Automotive	sales	revenue	includes	revenues	related	to	cash	and	financing	deliveries	of	new	vehicles,	and	specific	other	features	and	services	that
meet	the	definition	of	a	performance	obligation	under	ASC	606,	including	access	to	our	FSD	Capability	features	and	their	ongoing	maintenance,	internet
connectivity,	free	Supercharging	programs	and	over-the-air	software	updates.	We	recognize	revenue	on	automotive	sales	upon	delivery	to	the	customer,
which	is	when	the	control	of	a	vehicle	transfers.	Payments	are	typically	received	at	the	point	control	transfers	or	in	accordance	with	payment	terms
customary	to	the	business,	except	sales	we	finance	for	which	payments	are	collected	over	the	contractual	loan	term.	We	also	recognize	a	sales	return
reserve	based	on	historical	experience	plus	consideration	for	expected	future	market	values,	when	we	offer	resale	value	guarantees	or	similar	buyback
terms.	Other	features	and	services	such	as	access	to	our	internet	connectivity,	unlimited	free	Supercharging	and	over-the-air	software	updates	are
provisioned	upon	control	transfer	of	a	vehicle	and	recognized	over	time	on	a	straight-line	basis	as	we	have	a	stand-ready	obligation	to	deliver	such
services	to	the	customer.	Other	limited	free	Supercharging	incentives	are	recognized	based	on	actual	usage	or	expiration,	whichever	is	earlier.	We
recognize	revenue	related	to	these	other	features	and	services	over	the	performance	period,	which	is	generally	the	expected	ownership	life	of	the	vehicle.
Revenue	related	to	FSD	Capability	features	is	recognized	when	functionality	is	delivered	to	the	customer	and	their	ongoing	maintenance	is	recognized
over	time.	For	our	obligations	related	to	automotive	sales,	we	estimate	standalone	selling	price	by	considering	costs	used	to	develop	and	deliver	the
service,	third-party	pricing	of	similar	options	and	other	information	that	may	be	available.
Any	fees	that	are	paid	or	payable	by	us	to	a	customer’s	lender	when	we	arrange	the	financing	are	recognized	as	an	offset	against	automotive	sales
revenue.	Costs	to	obtain	a	contract	mainly	relate	to	commissions	paid	to	our	sales	personnel	for	the	sale	of	vehicles.	As	our	contract	costs	related	to
automotive	sales	are	typically	fulfilled	within	one	year,	the	costs	to	obtain	a	contract	are	expensed	as	incurred.	Amounts	billed	to	customers	related	to
shipping	and	handling	are	classified	as	automotive	sales	revenue,	and	we	have	elected	to	recognize	the	cost	for	freight	and	shipping	when	control	over
vehicles,	parts	or	accessories	have	transferred	to	the	customer	as	an	expense	in	cost	of	automotive	sales	revenue.	Our	policy	is	to	exclude	taxes
collected	from	a	customer	from	the	transaction	price	of	automotive	contracts.
55We	offer	resale	value	guarantees	to	our	commercial	banking	partners	in	connection	with	certain	vehicle	leasing	programs.	Under	these	programs,
we	originate	the	lease	with	our	end	customer	and	immediately	transfer	the	lease	and	the	underlying	vehicle	to	our	commercial	banking	partner,	with	the
transaction	being	accounted	for	as	a	sale	under	ASC	606.	We	receive	upfront	payment	for	the	vehicle,	do	not	bear	casualty	and	credit	risks	during	the
lease	term,	and	we	provide	a	guarantee	capped	to	a	limit	if	they	are	unable	to	sell	the	vehicle	at	or	above	the	vehicle’s	contract	residual	value	at	the	end
of	the	lease	term.	We	estimate	a	guarantee	liability	in	accordance	with	ASC	460,	
Guarantees	
and	record	it	within	other	liabilities	on	our	consolidated
balance	sheet.	On	a	quarterly	basis,	we	assess	the	estimated	market	value	of	vehicles	sold	under	this	program	to	determine	whether	there	have	been
changes	to	the	amount	of	expected	resale	value	guarantee	payments.	As	we	accumulate	more	data	related	to	the	resale	values	of	our	vehicles	or	as
market	conditions	change,	there	may	be	material	changes	to	their	estimated	values.	The	total	guarantee	liability	on	vehicles	sold	under	this	program	was
immaterial	as	of	December	31,	2023.
Deferred	revenue	related	to	the	access	to	our	FSD	Capability	features	and	their	ongoing	maintenance,	internet	connectivity,	free	Supercharging
programs	and	over-the-air	software	updates	primarily	on	automotive	sales	consisted	of	the	following	(in	millions):
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
Deferred	revenue—	beginning	of	period
$
2,913
	
$
2,382
	
Additions
1,201
	
1,178
	
Net	changes	in	liability	for	pre-existing	contracts
17
	
(
67
)
Revenue	recognized
(
595
)
(
580
)
Deferred	revenue—	end	of	period
$
3,536
	
$
2,913
	
Deferred	revenue	is	equivalent	to	the	total	transaction	price	allocated	to	the	performance	obligations	that	are	unsatisfied,	or	partially	unsatisfied,	as
of	the	balance	sheet	date.	Revenue	recognized	from	the	deferred	revenue	balance	as	of	December	31,	2022	was	$
469
	million	for	the	year	ended
December	31,	2023.	We	had	recognized	revenue	of	$
472
	million	from	the	deferred	revenue	balance	as	of	December	31,	2021,	for	the	year	ended
December	31,	2022,	primarily	related	to	the	general	FSD	Capability	feature	release	in	North	America	in	the	fourth	quarter	of	2022.	Of	the	total	deferred
revenue	balance	as	of	December	31,	2023,	we	expect	to	recognize	$
926
	million	of	revenue	in	the	next	
12
	months.	The	remaining	balance	will	be
recognized	at	the	time	of	transfer	of	control	of	the	product	or	over	the	performance	period	as	discussed	above	in	Automotive	Sales.
We	have	been	providing	loans	for	financing	our	automotive	deliveries	in	volume	since	fiscal	year	2022.	As	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022,	we	have
recorded	net	financing	receivables	on	the	consolidated	balance	sheets,	of	which	$
242
	million	and	$
128
	million,	respectively,	is	recorded	within	Accounts
receivable,	net,	for	the	current	portion	and	$
1.04
	billion	and	$
665
	million,	respectively,	is	recorded	within	Other	non-current	assets	for	the	long-term
portion.
Automotive	Regulatory	Credits
We	earn	tradable	credits	in	the	operation	of	our	automotive	business	under	various	regulations	related	to	ZEVs,	greenhouse	gas,	fuel	economy	and
clean	fuel.	We	sell	these	credits	to	other	regulated	entities	who	can	use	the	credits	to	comply	with	emission	standards	and	other	regulatory	requirements.
Payments	for	automotive	regulatory	credits	are	typically	received	at	the	point	control	transfers	to	the	customer,	or	in	accordance	with	payment
terms	customary	to	the	business.	We	recognize	revenue	on	the	sale	of	automotive	regulatory	credits,	which	have	negligible	incremental	costs	associated
with	them,	at	the	time	control	of	the	regulatory	credits	is	transferred	to	the	purchasing	party.	Deferred	revenue	related	to	sales	of	automotive	regulatory
credits	was	immaterial	as	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022.	Revenue	recognized	from	the	deferred	revenue	balance	as	of	December	31,	2022	and	2021
was	immaterial	for	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023	and	2022.	During	the	year	ended	December	31,	2022,	we	had	also	recognized	$
288
	million	in
revenue	due	to	changes	in	regulation	which	entitled	us	to	additional	consideration	for	credits	sold	previously.
56Automotive	Leasing	Revenue
Direct	Vehicle	Operating	Leasing	Program
We	have	outstanding	leases	under	our	direct	vehicle	operating	leasing	programs	in	the	U.S.,	Canada	and	in	certain	countries	in	Europe.	Qualifying
customers	are	permitted	to	lease	a	vehicle	directly	from	Tesla	for	up	to	
48
	months.	At	the	end	of	the	lease	term,	customers	are	generally	required	to
return	the	vehicles	to	us.	We	account	for	these	leasing	transactions	as	operating	leases.	We	record	leasing	revenues	to	
automotive	leasing	revenue
	on	a
straight-line	basis	over	the	contractual	term,	and	we	record	the	depreciation	of	these	vehicles	to	cost	of	automotive	leasing	revenue.	For	the	years	ended
December	31,	2023,	2022	and	2021,	we	recognized	$
1.86
	billion,	$
1.75
	billion	and	$
1.25
	billion	of	direct	vehicle	leasing	revenue,	respectively.	As	of
December	31,	2023	and	2022,	we	had	deferred	$
458
	million	and	$
407
	million,	respectively,	of	lease-related	upfront	payments,	which	will	be	recognized
on	a	straight-line	basis	over	the	contractual	terms	of	the	individual	leases.
Our	policy	is	to	exclude	taxes	collected	from	a	customer	from	the	transaction	price	of	automotive	contracts.
Direct	Sales-Type	Leasing	Program
We	have	outstanding	direct	leases	and	vehicles	financed	by	us	under	loan	arrangements	accounted	for	as	sales-type	leases	under	ASC	842,	
Leases
(“ASC	842”),	in	certain	countries	in	Asia	and	Europe.	Depending	on	the	specific	program,	customers	may	or	may	not	have	a	right	to	return	the	vehicle	to
us	during	or	at	the	end	of	the	lease	term.	If	the	customer	does	not	have	a	right	to	return,	the	customer	will	take	title	to	the	vehicle	at	the	end	of	the	lease
term	after	making	all	contractual	payments.	Under	the	programs	for	which	there	is	a	right	to	return,	the	purchase	option	is	reasonably	certain	to	be
exercised	by	the	lessee	and	we	therefore	expect	the	customer	to	take	title	to	the	vehicle	at	the	end	of	the	lease	term	after	making	all	contractual
payments.	Our	arrangements	under	these	programs	can	have	terms	for	up	to	
72
	months.	We	recognize	all	revenue	and	costs	associated	with	the	sales-
type	lease	as	automotive	leasing	revenue	and	automotive	leasing	cost	of	revenue,	respectively,	upon	delivery	of	the	vehicle	to	the	customer.	Interest
income	based	on	the	implicit	rate	in	the	lease	is	recorded	to	automotive	leasing	revenue	over	time	as	customers	are	invoiced	on	a	monthly	basis.	For	the
years	ended	December	31,	2023,	2022	and	2021,	we	recognized	$
215
	million,	$
683
	million	and	$
369
	million,	respectively,	of	sales-type	leasing	revenue
and	$
164
	million,	$
427
	million	and	$
234
	million,	respectively,	of	sales-type	leasing	cost	of	revenue.
Services	and	Other	Revenue
Services	and	other	revenue	consists	of	sales	of	used	vehicles,	non-warranty	after-sales	vehicle	services,	body	shop	and	parts,	paid	Supercharging,
vehicle	insurance	revenue	and	retail	merchandise.
Revenues	related	to	repair,	maintenance	and	vehicle	insurance	services	are	recognized	over	time	as	services	are	provided	and	extended	service
plans	are	recognized	over	the	performance	period	of	the	service	contract	as	the	obligation	represents	a	stand-ready	obligation	to	the	customer.	We	sell
used	vehicles,	services,	service	plans,	vehicle	components	and	merchandise	separately	and	thus	use	standalone	selling	prices	as	the	basis	for	revenue
allocation	to	the	extent	that	these	items	are	sold	in	transactions	with	other	performance	obligations.	Payment	for	used	vehicles,	services,	vehicle
components,	and	merchandise	are	typically	received	at	the	point	when	control	transfers	to	the	customer	or	in	accordance	with	payment	terms	customary
to	the	business.	Payments	received	for	prepaid	plans	are	refundable	upon	customer	cancellation	of	the	related	contracts	and	are	included	within
Customer	deposits	on	the	consolidated	balance	sheets.	We	record	in	Deferred	revenue	any	non-refundable	prepayment	amounts	that	are	collected	from
customers	and	unearned	insurance	premiums,	which	is	recognized	as	revenue	ratably	over	the	respective	customer	contract	term.	Deferred	revenue
excluding	unearned	insurance	premiums	was	immaterial	as	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022.
57Energy	Generation	and	Storage	Segment
Energy	Generation	and	Storage	Sales
Energy	generation	and	storage	sales	revenue	consists	of	the	sale	of	solar	energy	systems	and	energy	storage	systems	to	residential,	small
commercial,	large	commercial	and	utility	grade	customers.	Sales	of	solar	energy	systems	to	residential	and	small	scale	commercial	customers	consist	of
the	engineering,	design	and	installation	of	the	system.	Residential	and	small	scale	commercial	customers	pay	the	full	purchase	price	of	the	solar	energy
system	upfront.	Revenue	for	the	design	and	installation	obligation	is	recognized	when	control	transfers,	which	is	when	we	install	a	solar	energy	system
and	the	system	passes	inspection	by	the	utility	or	the	authority	having	jurisdiction.	Sales	of	energy	storage	systems	to	residential	and	small	scale
commercial	customers	consist	of	the	installation	of	the	energy	storage	system	and	revenue	is	recognized	when	control	transfers,	which	is	when	the
product	has	been	delivered	or,	if	we	are	performing	installation,	when	installed	and	commissioned.	Payment	for	such	storage	systems	is	made	upon
invoice	or	in	accordance	with	payment	terms	customary	to	the	business.
For	large	commercial	and	utility	grade	energy	storage	system	sales	which	consist	of	the	engineering,	design	and	installation	of	the	system,
customers	make	milestone	payments	that	are	consistent	with	contract-specific	phases	of	a	project.	Revenue	from	such	contracts	is	recognized	over	time
using	the	percentage	of	completion	method	based	on	cost	incurred	as	a	percentage	of	total	estimated	contract	costs	for	energy	storage	system	sales.
In	instances	where	there	are	multiple	performance	obligations	in	a	single	contract,	we	allocate	the	consideration	to	the	various	obligations	in	the
contract	based	on	the	relative	standalone	selling	price	method.	Standalone	selling	prices	are	estimated	based	on	estimated	costs	plus	margin	or	by	using
market	data	for	comparable	products.	Costs	to	obtain	a	contract	relate	mainly	to	commissions	paid	to	our	sales	personnel	related	to	the	sale	of	energy
storage	systems.	As	our	contract	costs	related	to	energy	storage	system	sales	are	typically	fulfilled	within	one	year,	the	costs	to	obtain	a	contract	are
expensed	as	incurred.
As	part	of	our	energy	storage	system	contracts,	we	may	provide	the	customer	with	performance	guarantees	that	warrant	that	the	underlying	system
will	meet	or	exceed	the	minimum	energy	performance	requirements	specified	in	the	contract.	If	an	energy	storage	system	does	not	meet	the
performance	guarantee	requirements,	we	may	be	required	to	pay	liquidated	damages.	Other	forms	of	variable	consideration	related	to	our	large
commercial	and	utility	grade	energy	storage	system	contracts	include	variable	customer	payments	that	will	be	made	based	on	our	energy	market
participation	activities.	Such	guarantees	and	variable	customer	payments	represent	a	form	of	variable	consideration	and	are	estimated	at	contract
inception	at	their	most	likely	amount	and	updated	at	the	end	of	each	reporting	period	as	additional	performance	data	becomes	available.	Such	estimates
are	included	in	the	transaction	price	only	to	the	extent	that	it	is	probable	a	significant	reversal	of	revenue	will	not	occur.
We	record	as	deferred	revenue	any	non-refundable	amounts	that	are	collected	from	customers	related	to	fees	charged	for	prepayments,	which	is
recognized	as	revenue	ratably	over	the	respective	customer	contract	term.	As	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022,	deferred	revenue	related	to	such
customer	payments	amounted	to	$
1.60
	billion	and	$
863
	million,	respectively,	mainly	due	to	contractual	payment	terms.	Revenue	recognized	from	the
deferred	revenue	balance	as	of	December	31,	2022	and	2021	was	$
571
	million	and	$
171
	million	for	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023	and	2022,
respectively.	We	have	elected	the	practical	expedient	to	omit	disclosure	of	the	amount	of	the	transaction	price	allocated	to	remaining	performance
obligations	for	energy	generation	and	storage	sales	with	an	original	expected	contract	length	of	one	year	or	less	and	the	amount	that	we	have	the	right	to
invoice	when	that	amount	corresponds	directly	with	the	value	of	the	performance	to	date.	As	of	December	31,	2023,	total	transaction	price	allocated	to
performance	obligations	that	were	unsatisfied	or	partially	unsatisfied	for	contracts	with	an	original	expected	length	of	more	than	one	year	was	$
3.43
billion.	Of	this	amount,	we	expect	to	recognize	$
1.05
	billion	in	the	next	
12
	months	and	the	rest	over	the	remaining	performance	obligation	period.
We	have	been	providing	loans	for	financing	our	energy	generation	products	in	volume	since	fiscal	year	2022.	As	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022,
we	have	recorded	net	financing	receivables	on	the	consolidated	balance	sheets,	of	which	$
31
	million	and	$
24
	million,	respectively,	is	recorded	within
Accounts	receivable,	net,	for	the	current	portion	and	$
578
	million	and	$
387
	million,	respectively,	is	recorded	within	Other	non-current	assets	for	the	long-
term	portion.
58Energy	Generation	and	Storage	Leasing
For	revenue	arrangements	where	we	are	the	lessor	under	operating	lease	agreements	for	energy	generation	and	storage	products,	we	record	lease
revenue	from	minimum	lease	payments,	including	upfront	rebates	and	incentives	earned	from	such	systems,	on	a	straight-line	basis	over	the	life	of	the
lease	term,	assuming	all	other	revenue	recognition	criteria	have	been	met.	The	difference	between	the	payments	received	and	the	revenue	recognized	is
recorded	as	deferred	revenue	or	deferred	asset	on	the	consolidated	balance	sheet.
For	solar	energy	systems	where	customers	purchase	electricity	from	us	under	PPAs	prior	to	January	1,	2019,	we	have	determined	that	these
agreements	should	be	accounted	for	as	operating	leases	pursuant	to	ASC	840,	
Leases
.	Revenue	is	recognized	based	on	the	amount	of	electricity
delivered	at	rates	specified	under	the	contracts,	assuming	all	other	revenue	recognition	criteria	are	met.
We	record	as	deferred	revenue	any	amounts	that	are	collected	from	customers,	including	lease	prepayments,	in	excess	of	revenue	recognized,
which	is	recognized	as	revenue	ratably	over	the	respective	customer	contract	term.	As	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022,	deferred	revenue	related	to	such
customer	payments	amounted	to	$
181
	million	and	$
191
	million,	respectively.	Deferred	revenue	also	includes	the	portion	of	rebates	and	incentives
received	from	utility	companies	and	various	local	and	state	government	agencies,	which	is	recognized	as	revenue	over	the	lease	term.	As	of
December	31,	2023	and	2022,	deferred	revenue	from	rebates	and	incentives	was	immaterial.
We	capitalize	initial	direct	costs	from	the	execution	of	agreements	for	solar	energy	systems	and	PPAs,	which	include	the	referral	fees	and	sales
commissions,	as	an	element	of	solar	energy	systems,	net,	and	subsequently	amortize	these	costs	over	the	term	of	the	related	agreements.
Cost	of	Revenues
Automotive	Segment
Automotive	Sales
Cost	of	automotive	sales	revenue	includes	direct	and	indirect	materials,	labor	costs,	manufacturing	overhead,	including	depreciation	costs	of	tooling
and	machinery,	shipping	and	logistic	costs,	vehicle	connectivity	costs,	FSD	Capability	ongoing	maintenance	costs,	allocations	of	electricity	and
infrastructure	costs	related	to	our	Supercharger	network	and	reserves	for	estimated	warranty	expenses.	Cost	of	automotive	sales	revenues	also	includes
adjustments	to	warranty	expense	and	charges	to	write	down	the	carrying	value	of	our	inventory	when	it	exceeds	its	estimated	net	realizable	value	and	to
provide	for	obsolete	and	on-hand	inventory	in	excess	of	forecasted	demand.	Additionally,	cost	of	automotive	sales	revenue	benefits	from	manufacturing
credits	earned.
Automotive	Leasing
Cost	of	automotive	leasing	revenue	includes	the	depreciation	of	operating	lease	vehicles,	cost	of	goods	sold	associated	with	direct	sales-type	leases
and	warranty	expense	related	to	leased	vehicles.
Services	and	Other
Costs	of	services	and	other	revenue	includes	cost	of	used	vehicles	including	refurbishment	costs,	costs	associated	with	providing	non-warranty
after-sales	services,	costs	associated	with	our	body	shops	and	part	sales,	costs	of	paid	Supercharging,	costs	to	provide	vehicle	insurance	and	costs	for
retail	merchandise.
Energy	Generation	and	Storage	Segment
Energy	Generation	and	Storage
Cost	of	energy	generation	and	storage	revenue	includes	direct	and	indirect	material	and	labor	costs,	overhead	costs,	freight,	warranty	expense,	and
amortization	of	certain	acquired	intangible	assets.	Cost	of	energy	generation	and	storage	revenue	also	includes	charges	to	write	down	the	carrying	value
of	our	inventory	when	it	exceeds	its	estimated	net	realizable	value	and	to	provide	for	obsolete	and	on-hand	inventory	in	excess	of	forecasted	demand.
Additionally,	cost	of	energy	generation	and	storage	revenue	benefits	from	manufacturing	credits	earned.	In	agreements	for	solar	energy	systems	and
PPAs	where	we	are	the	lessor,	the	cost	of	revenue	is	primarily	comprised	of	depreciation	of	the	cost	of	leased	solar	energy	systems,	maintenance	costs
associated	with	those	systems	and	amortization	of	any	initial	direct	costs.
59Research	and	Development	Costs
Research	and	development	costs	are	expensed	as	incurred.
Income	Taxes
We	are	subject	to	income	taxes	in	the	U.S.	and	in	many	foreign	jurisdictions.	Income	taxes	are	computed	using	the	asset	and	liability	method,	under
which	deferred	tax	assets	and	liabilities	are	determined	based	on	the	difference	between	the	financial	statement	and	tax	bases	of	assets	and	liabilities
using	enacted	tax	rates	in	effect	for	the	year	in	which	the	differences	are	expected	to	affect	taxable	income.	Valuation	allowances	are	established	when
necessary	to	reduce	deferred	tax	assets	to	the	amount	expected	to	be	realized.
We	monitor	the	realizability	of	our	deferred	tax	assets	taking	into	account	all	relevant	factors	at	each	reporting	period.	Significant	judgment	is
required	in	determining	our	provision	for	income	taxes,	our	deferred	tax	assets	and	liabilities	and	any	valuation	allowance	recorded	against	our	net
deferred	tax	assets	that	are	not	more	likely	than	not	to	be	realized.	In	completing	our	assessment	of	realizability	of	our	deferred	tax	assets,	we	consider
our	history	of	income	(loss)	measured	at	pre-tax	income	(loss)	adjusted	for	permanent	book-tax	differences	on	a	jurisdictional	basis,	volatility	in	actual
earnings,	excess	tax	benefits	related	to	stock-based	compensation	in	recent	prior	years,	and	impacts	of	the	timing	of	reversal	of	existing	temporary
differences.	We	also	rely	on	our	assessment	of	the	Company’s	projected	future	results	of	business	operations,	including	uncertainty	in	future	operating
results	relative	to	historical	results,	volatility	in	the	market	price	of	our	common	stock	and	its	performance	over	time,	variable	macroeconomic	conditions
impacting	our	ability	to	forecast	future	taxable	income,	and	changes	in	business	that	may	affect	the	existence	and	magnitude	of	future	taxable	income.
Our	valuation	allowance	assessment	is	based	on	our	best	estimate	of	future	results	considering	all	available	information.
We	record	liabilities	related	to	uncertain	tax	positions	when,	despite	our	belief	that	our	tax	return	positions	are	supportable,	we	believe	that	it	is
more	likely	than	not	that	those	positions	may	not	be	fully	sustained	upon	review	by	tax	authorities.	Accrued	interest	and	penalties	related	to
unrecognized	tax	benefits	are	classified	as	income	tax	expense.
The	Tax	Cuts	and	Jobs	Act	subjects	a	U.S.	shareholder	to	tax	on	global	intangible	low-taxed	income	(“GILTI”)	earned	by	certain	foreign	subsidiaries.
Under	GAAP,	we	can	make	an	accounting	policy	election	to	either	treat	taxes	due	on	the	GILTI	inclusion	as	a	current	period	expense	or	factor	such
amounts	into	our	measurement	of	deferred	taxes.	We	elected	the	deferred	method,	under	which	we	recorded	the	corresponding	deferred	tax	assets	and
liabilities	in	our	consolidated	balance	sheets.
Comprehensive	Income
Comprehensive	income	is	comprised	of	net	income	and	other	comprehensive	income	(loss).	Other	comprehensive	income	(loss)	consists	of	foreign
currency	translation	adjustments	and	unrealized	net	gains	and	losses	on	investments	that	have	been	excluded	from	the	determination	of	net	income.
Stock-Based	Compensation
We	use	the	fair	value	method	of	accounting	for	our	stock	options	and	RSUs	granted	to	employees	and	for	our	ESPP	to	measure	the	cost	of	employee
services	received	in	exchange	for	the	stock-based	awards.	The	fair	value	of	stock	option	awards	with	only	service	and/or	performance	conditions	is
estimated	on	the	grant	or	offering	date	using	the	Black-Scholes	option-pricing	model.	The	Black-Scholes	option-pricing	model	requires	inputs	such	as	the
risk-free	interest	rate,	expected	term	and	expected	volatility.	These	inputs	are	subjective	and	generally	require	significant	judgment.	The	fair	value	of
RSUs	is	measured	on	the	grant	date	based	on	the	closing	fair	market	value	of	our	common	stock.	The	resulting	cost	is	recognized	over	the	period	during
which	an	employee	is	required	to	provide	service	in	exchange	for	the	awards,	usually	the	vesting	period,	which	is	generally	
four	years
	for	stock	options
and	RSUs	and	
six	months
	for	the	ESPP.	Stock-based	compensation	expense	is	recognized	on	a	straight-line	basis,	net	of	actual	forfeitures	in	the	period.
For	performance-based	awards,	stock-based	compensation	expense	is	recognized	over	the	expected	performance	achievement	period	of	individual
performance	milestones	when	the	achievement	of	each	individual	performance	milestone	becomes	probable.
60As	we	accumulate	additional	employee	stock-based	awards	data	over	time	and	as	we	incorporate	market	data	related	to	our	common	stock,	we	may
calculate	significantly	different	volatilities	and	expected	lives,	which	could	materially	impact	the	valuation	of	our	stock-based	awards	and	the	stock-based
compensation	expense	that	we	will	recognize	in	future	periods.	Stock-based	compensation	expense	is	recorded	in	Cost	of	revenues,	Research	and
development	expense	and	Selling,	general	and	administrative	expense	in	the	consolidated	statements	of	operations.
Noncontrolling	Interests	and	Redeemable	Noncontrolling	Interests
Noncontrolling	interests	and	redeemable	noncontrolling	interests	represent	third-party	interests	in	the	net	assets	under	certain	funding
arrangements,	or	funds,	that	we	have	entered	into	to	finance	the	costs	of	solar	energy	systems	and	vehicles	under	operating	leases.	We	have	determined
that	the	contractual	provisions	of	the	funds	represent	substantive	profit-sharing	arrangements.	We	have	further	determined	that	the	methodology	for
calculating	the	noncontrolling	interest	and	redeemable	noncontrolling	interest	balances	that	reflects	the	substantive	profit-sharing	arrangements	is	a
balance	sheet	approach	using	the	hypothetical	liquidation	at	book	value	(“HLBV”)	method.	We,	therefore,	determine	the	amount	of	the	noncontrolling
interests	and	redeemable	noncontrolling	interests	in	the	net	assets	of	the	funds	at	each	balance	sheet	date	using	the	HLBV	method,	which	is	presented	on
the	consolidated	balance	sheet	as	noncontrolling	interests	in	subsidiaries	and	redeemable	noncontrolling	interests	in	subsidiaries.	Under	the	HLBV
method,	the	amounts	reported	as	noncontrolling	interests	and	redeemable	noncontrolling	interests	in	the	consolidated	balance	sheet	represent	the
amounts	the	third	parties	would	hypothetically	receive	at	each	balance	sheet	date	under	the	liquidation	provisions	of	the	funds,	assuming	the	net	assets
of	the	funds	were	liquidated	at	their	recorded	amounts	determined	in	accordance	with	GAAP	and	with	tax	laws	effective	at	the	balance	sheet	date	and
distributed	to	the	third	parties.	The	third	parties’	interests	in	the	results	of	operations	of	the	funds	are	determined	as	the	difference	in	the	noncontrolling
interest	and	redeemable	noncontrolling	interest	balances	in	the	consolidated	balance	sheets	between	the	start	and	end	of	each	reporting	period,	after
taking	into	account	any	capital	transactions	between	the	funds	and	the	third	parties.	However,	the	redeemable	noncontrolling	interest	balance	is	at	least
equal	to	the	redemption	amount.	The	redeemable	noncontrolling	interest	balance	is	presented	as	temporary	equity	in	the	mezzanine	section	of	the
consolidated	balance	sheet	since	these	third	parties	have	the	right	to	redeem	their	interests	in	the	funds	for	cash	or	other	assets.	For	certain	funds,	there
have	been	significant	fluctuations	in	net	(loss)	income	attributable	to	noncontrolling	interests	and	redeemable	noncontrolling	interests	in	subsidiaries	due
to	changes	in	the	liquidation	provisions	as	time-based	milestones	have	been	reached.
Net	Income	per	Share	of	Common	Stock	Attributable	to	Common	Stockholders
Basic	net	income	per	share	of	common	stock	attributable	to	common	stockholders	is	calculated	by	dividing	net	income	attributable	to	common
stockholders	by	the	weighted-average	shares	of	common	stock	outstanding	for	the	period.	Potentially	dilutive	shares,	which	are	based	on	the	weighted-
average	shares	of	common	stock	underlying	outstanding	stock-based	awards,	warrants	and	convertible	senior	notes	using	the	treasury	stock	method	or
the	if-converted	method,	as	applicable,	are	included	when	calculating	diluted	net	income	per	share	of	common	stock	attributable	to	common	stockholders
when	their	effect	is	dilutive.
Furthermore,	in	connection	with	the	offerings	of	our	convertible	senior	notes,	we	entered	into	convertible	note	hedges	and	warrants	(see	Note	11,
Debt
).	However,	our	convertible	note	hedges	are	not	included	when	calculating	potentially	dilutive	shares	since	their	effect	is	always	anti-dilutive.	The
strike	price	on	the	warrants	were	below	our	average	share	price	during	the	period	and	were	included	in	the	tables	below.	Warrants	are	included	in	the
weighted-average	shares	used	in	computing	basic	net	income	per	share	of	common	stock	in	the	period(s)	they	are	settled.
The	following	table	presents	the	reconciliation	of	net	income	attributable	to	common	stockholders	to	net	income	used	in	computing	basic	and
diluted	net	income	per	share	of	common	stock	(in	millions):
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
2021
Net	income	attributable	to	common	stockholders
$
14,997
	
$
12,556
	
$
5,519
	
Less:	Buy-out	of	noncontrolling	interest
(
2
)
(
27
)
(
5
)
Net	income	used	in	computing	basic	net	income	per	share	of	common	stock
14,999
	
12,583
	
5,524
	
Less:	Dilutive	convertible	debt
—
	
(
1
)
(
9
)
Net	income	used	in	computing	diluted	net	income	per	share	of	common	stock
$
14,999
	
$
12,584
	
$
5,533
	
61The	following	table	presents	the	reconciliation	of	basic	to	diluted	weighted	average	shares	used	in	computing	net	income	per	share	of	common
stock	attributable	to	common	stockholders	(in	millions):
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
2021
Weighted	average	shares	used	in	computing	net	income	per	share	of	common	stock,
basic
3,174
3,130
2,959
Add:
Stock-based	awards
298
310
292
Convertible	senior	notes
2
3
29
Warrants
11
32
106
Weighted	average	shares	used	in	computing	net	income	per	share	of	common	stock,
diluted
3,485
3,475
3,386
The	following	table	presents	the	potentially	dilutive	shares	that	were	excluded	from	the	computation	of	diluted	net	income	per	share	of	common
stock	attributable	to	common	stockholders,	because	their	effect	was	anti-dilutive	(in	millions):
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
2021
Stock-based	awards
12
4
1
Business	Combinations
We	account	for	business	acquisitions	under	ASC	805,	
Business	Combinations
.	The	total	purchase	consideration	for	an	acquisition	is	measured	as	the
fair	value	of	the	assets	given,	equity	instruments	issued	and	liabilities	assumed	at	the	acquisition	date.	Costs	that	are	directly	attributable	to	the
acquisition	are	expensed	as	incurred.	Identifiable	assets	(including	intangible	assets),	liabilities	assumed	(including	contingent	liabilities)	and
noncontrolling	interests	in	an	acquisition	are	measured	initially	at	their	fair	values	at	the	acquisition	date.	We	recognize	goodwill	if	the	fair	value	of	the
total	purchase	consideration	and	any	noncontrolling	interests	is	in	excess	of	the	net	fair	value	of	the	identifiable	assets	acquired	and	the	liabilities
assumed.	We	recognize	a	bargain	purchase	gain	within	Other	income	(expense),	net,	in	the	consolidated	statement	of	operations	if	the	net	fair	value	of
the	identifiable	assets	acquired	and	the	liabilities	assumed	is	in	excess	of	the	fair	value	of	the	total	purchase	consideration	and	any	noncontrolling
interests.	We	include	the	results	of	operations	of	the	acquired	business	in	the	consolidated	financial	statements	beginning	on	the	acquisition	date.
Cash	and	Cash	Equivalents
All	highly	liquid	investments	with	an	original	maturity	of	three	months	or	less	at	the	date	of	purchase	are	considered	cash	equivalents.	Our	cash
equivalents	are	primarily	comprised	of	U.S.	government	securities,	money	market	funds	and	commercial	paper.
Restricted	Cash
We	maintain	certain	cash	balances	restricted	as	to	withdrawal	or	use.	Our	restricted	cash	is	comprised	primarily	of	cash	held	to	service	certain
payments	under	various	secured	debt	facilities.	In	addition,	restricted	cash	includes	cash	held	as	collateral	for	sales	to	lease	partners	with	a	resale	value
guarantee,	letters	of	credit,	real	estate	leases	and	deposits	held	for	our	insurance	services.	We	record	restricted	cash	as	other	assets	in	the	consolidated
balance	sheets	and	determine	current	or	non-current	classification	based	on	the	expected	duration	of	the	restriction.
62Our	total	cash	and	cash	equivalents	and	restricted	cash,	as	presented	in	the	consolidated	statements	of	cash	flows,	was	as	follows	(in	millions):
December	31,
2023
December	31,
2022
December	31,
2021
Cash	and	cash	equivalents
$
16,398
	
$
16,253
	
$
17,576
	
Restricted	cash	included	in	prepaid	expenses	and	other	current	assets
543
	
294
	
345
	
Restricted	cash	included	in	other	non-current	assets
248
	
377
	
223
	
Total	as	presented	in	the	consolidated	statements	of	cash	flows
$
17,189
	
$
16,924
	
$
18,144
	
Investments
Investments	may	be	comprised	of	a	combination	of	marketable	securities,	including
	
U.S.	government	securities,	corporate	debt	securities,
commercial	paper,	time	deposits,	and	certain	certificates	of	deposit,	which	are	all	designated	as	available-for-sale	and	reported	at	estimated	fair	value,
with	unrealized	gains	and	losses	recorded	in	accumulated	other	comprehensive	income	which	is	included	within	stockholders’	equity.	Available-for-sale
marketable	securities	with	maturities	greater	than	three	months	at	the	date	of	purchase	are	included	in	short-term	investments	in	our	consolidated
balance	sheets.	Interest,	dividends,	amortization	and	accretion	of	purchase	premiums	and	discounts	on	these	investments	are	included	within	Interest
income	in	our	consolidated	statements	of	operations.
The	cost	of	available-for-sale	investments	sold	is	based	on	the	specific	identification	method.	Realized	gains	and	losses	on	the	sale	of	available-for-
sale	investments	are	recorded	in	Other	income	(expense),	net.
We	regularly	review	all	of	our	investments	for	declines	in	fair	value.	The	review	includes	but	is	not	limited	to	(i)	the	consideration	of	the	cause	of	the
decline,	(ii)	any	currently	recorded	expected	credit	losses	and	(iii)	the	creditworthiness	of	the	respective	security	issuers.	The	amortized	cost	basis	of	our
investments	approximates	its	fair	value.
Accounts	Receivable	and	Allowance	for	Doubtful	Accounts
Accounts	receivable	primarily	include	amounts	related	to	receivables	from	financial	institutions	and	leasing	companies	offering	various	financing
products	to	our	customers,	sales	of	energy	generation	and	storage	products,	sales	of	regulatory	credits	to	other	automotive	manufacturers	and
government	rebates	already	passed	through	to	customers.	We	provide	an	allowance	against	accounts	receivable	for	the	amount	we	expect	to	be
uncollectible.	We	write-off	accounts	receivable	against	the	allowance	when	they	are	deemed	uncollectible.
Depending	on	the	day	of	the	week	on	which	the	end	of	a	fiscal	quarter	falls,	our	accounts	receivable	balance	may	fluctuate	as	we	are	waiting	for
certain	customer	payments	to	clear	through	our	banking	institutions	and	receipts	of	payments	from	our	financing	partners,	which	can	take	up	to
approximately	two	weeks	based	on	the	contractual	payment	terms	with	such	partners.	Our	accounts	receivable	balances	associated	with	our	sales	of
regulatory	credits	are	dependent	on	contractual	payment	terms.	Additionally,	government	rebates	can	take	up	to	a	year	or	more	to	be	collected
depending	on	the	customary	processing	timelines	of	the	specific	jurisdictions	issuing	them.	These	various	factors	may	have	a	significant	impact	on	our
accounts	receivable	balance	from	period	to	period.
	As	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022,	we	had	$
207
	million	and	$
753
	million,	respectively,	of	long-term
government	rebates	receivable	in	Other	non-current	assets	in	our	consolidated	balance	sheets.
Financing	Receivables
We	provide	financing	options	to	our	customers	for	our	automotive	and	energy	products.	Financing	receivables	are	carried	at	amortized	cost,	net	of
allowance	for	loan	losses.	Provisions	for	loan	losses	are	charged	to	operations	in	amounts	sufficient	to	maintain	the	allowance	for	loan	losses	at	levels
considered	adequate	to	cover	expected	credit	losses	on	the	financing	receivables.	In	determining	expected	credit	losses,	we	consider	our	historical	level
of	credit	losses,	current	economic	trends,	and	reasonable	and	supportable	forecasts	that	affect	the	collectability	of	the	future	cash	flows.
When	originating	consumer	receivables,	we	review	the	credit	application,	the	proposed	contract	terms,	credit	bureau	information	(e.g.,	FICO	score)
and	other	information.	Our	evaluation	emphasizes	the	applicant’s	ability	to	pay	and	creditworthiness	focusing	on	payment,	affordability,	and	applicant
credit	history	as	key	considerations.	Generally,	all	customers	in	this	portfolio	have	strong	creditworthiness	at	loan	origination.
63After	origination,	we	review	the	credit	quality	of	retail	financing	based	on	customer	payment	activity	and	aging	analysis.	For	all	financing
receivables,	we	define	“past	due”	as	any	payment,	including	principal	and	interest,	which	is	at	least	31	days	past	the	contractual	due	date.
	As	of
December	31,	2023	and	2022,	the	vast	majority	of	our	financing	receivables	were	at	current	status	with	only	an	immaterial	balance	being	past	due.	As	of
December	31,	2023,	the	majority	of	our	financing	receivables,	excluding	MyPower	notes	receivable,	were	originated	in	2023	and	2022,	and	as	of
December	31,	2022,	the	majority	of	our	financing	receivables,	excluding	MyPower	notes	receivable,	were	originated	in	2022.
We	have	customer	notes	receivable	under	the	legacy	MyPower	loan	program,	which	provided	residential	customers	with	the	option	to	finance	the
purchase	of	a	solar	energy	system	through	a	
30-year
	loan	and	were	all	originated	prior	to	year	2018.	The	outstanding	balances,	net	of	any	allowance	for
expected	credit	losses,	are	presented	on	the	consolidated	balance	sheets	as	a	component	of	Prepaid	expenses	and	other	current	assets	for	the	current
portion	and	as	Other	non-current	assets	for	the	long-term	portion.	As	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022,	the	total	outstanding	balance	of	MyPower
customer	notes	receivable,	net	of	allowance	for	expected	credit	losses,	was	$
266
	million	and	$
280
	million,	respectively,	of	which	$
5
	million	and	$
7
	million
were	due	in	the	next	12	months	as	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022,	respectively.	As	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022,	the	allowance	for	expected	credit
losses	was	$
36
	million	and	$
37
	million,	respectively.
Concentration	of	Risk
Credit	Risk
Financial	instruments	that	potentially	subject	us	to	a	concentration	of	credit	risk	consist	of	cash,	cash	equivalents,	investments,	restricted	cash,
accounts	receivable	and	other	finance	receivables.	Our	cash	and	investments	balances	are	primarily	on	deposit	at	high	credit	quality	financial	institutions
or	invested	in	money	market	funds.	These	deposits	are	typically	in	excess	of	insured	limits.	As	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022,	no	entity	represented
10%	or	more	of	our	total	receivables	balance.
Supply	Risk
We	are	dependent	on	our	suppliers,	including	single	source	suppliers,	and	the	inability	of	these	suppliers	to	deliver	necessary	components	of	our
products	in	a	timely	manner	at	prices,	quality	levels	and	volumes	acceptable	to	us,	or	our	inability	to	efficiently	manage	these	components	from	these
suppliers,	could	have	a	material	adverse	effect	on	our	business,	prospects,	financial	condition	and	operating	results.
Inventory	Valuation
Inventories	are	stated	at	the	lower	of	cost	or	net	realizable	value.	Cost	is	computed	using	standard	cost	for	vehicles	and	energy	products,	which
approximates	actual	cost	on	a	first-in,	first-out	basis.	We	record	inventory	write-downs	for	excess	or	obsolete	inventories	based	upon	assumptions	about
current	and	future	demand	forecasts.	If	our	inventory	on-hand	is	in	excess	of	our	future	demand	forecast,	the	excess	amounts	are	written-off.
We	also	review	our	inventory	to	determine	whether	its	carrying	value	exceeds	the	net	amount	realizable	upon	the	ultimate	sale	of	the	inventory.
This	requires	us	to	determine	the	estimated	selling	price	of	our	vehicles	less	the	estimated	cost	to	convert	the	inventory	on-hand	into	a	finished	product.
Once	inventory	is	written-down,	a	new,	lower	cost	basis	for	that	inventory	is	established	and	subsequent	changes	in	facts	and	circumstances	do	not	result
in	the	restoration	or	increase	in	that	newly	established	cost	basis.
Should	our	estimates	of	future	selling	prices	or	production	costs	change,	additional	and	potentially	material	write-downs	may	be	required.	A	small
change	in	our	estimates	may	result	in	a	material	charge	to	our	reported	financial	results.
Operating	Lease	Vehicles
Vehicles	that	are	leased	as	part	of	our	direct	vehicle	leasing	program	are	classified	as	operating	lease	vehicles	at	cost	less	accumulated
depreciation.	We	generally	depreciate	their	cost,	less	residual	value,	using	the	straight-line-method	to	cost	of	automotive	leasing	revenue	over	the
contractual	period.
	The	gross	cost	of	operating	lease	vehicles	as	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022	was	$
7.36
	billion	and	$
6.08
	billion,	respectively.
Operating	lease	vehicles	on	the	consolidated	balance	sheets	are	presented	net	of	accumulated	depreciation	of	$
1.38
	billion	and	$
1.04
	billion	as	of
December	31,	2023	and	2022,	respectively.
64Digital	Assets,	Net
We	currently	account	for	all	digital	assets	held	as	indefinite-lived	intangible	assets	in	accordance	with	ASC	350,	
Intangibles—Goodwill	and	Other
.	We
have	ownership	of	and	control	over	our	digital	assets	and	we	may	use	third-party	custodial	services	to	secure	it.	The	digital	assets	are	initially	recorded	at
cost	and	are	subsequently	remeasured	on	the	consolidated	balance	sheet	at	cost,	net	of	any	impairment	losses	incurred	since	acquisition.
We	determine	the	fair	value	of	our	digital	assets	on	a	nonrecurring	basis	in	accordance	with	ASC	820,	
Fair	Value	Measurement	
(“ASC	820”),	based
on	quoted	prices	on	the	active	exchange(s)	that	we	have	determined	is	the	principal	market	for	such	assets	(Level	I	inputs).	We	perform	an	analysis	each
quarter	to	identify	whether	events	or	changes	in	circumstances,	principally	decreases	in	the	quoted	prices	on	active	exchanges,	indicate	that	it	is	more
likely	than	not	that	our	digital	assets	are	impaired.	In	determining	if	an	impairment	has	occurred,	we	consider	the	lowest	market	price	of	one	unit	of
digital	asset	quoted	on	the	active	exchange	since	acquiring	the	digital	asset.	When	the	then	current	carrying	value	of	a	digital	asset	exceeds	the	fair
value	determined	each	quarter,	an	impairment	loss	has	occurred	with	respect	to	those	digital	assets	in	the	amount	equal	to	the	difference	between	their
carrying	values	and	the	prices	determined.
Impairment	losses	are	recognized	within	Restructuring	and	other	in	the	consolidated	statements	of	operations	in	the	period	in	which	the	impairment
is	identified.	Gains	are	not	recorded	until	realized	upon	sale(s),	at	which	point	they	are	presented	net	of	any	impairment	losses	for	the	same	digital	assets
held	within	Restructuring	and	other.	In	determining	the	gain	to	be	recognized	upon	sale,	we	calculate	the	difference	between	the	sales	price	and	carrying
value	of	the	digital	assets	sold	immediately	prior	to	sale.
See	Note	3,	
Digital	Assets,	Net
,	for	further	information	regarding	digital	assets.
Solar	Energy	Systems,	Net
We	are	the	lessor	of	solar	energy	systems.	Solar	energy	systems	are	stated	at	cost	less	accumulated	depreciation.
Depreciation	and	amortization	is	calculated	using	the	straight-line	method	over	the	estimated	useful	lives	of	the	respective	assets,	as	follows:
Solar	energy	systems	in	service
30
	to	
35
	years
Initial	direct	costs	related	to	customer	solar	energy	system	lease	acquisition	costs
Lease	term	(up	to	
25
	years)
Solar	energy	systems	pending	interconnection	will	be	depreciated	as	solar	energy	systems	in	service	when	they	have	been	interconnected	and
placed	in-service.	Solar	energy	systems	under	construction	represents	systems	that	are	under	installation,	which	will	be	depreciated	as	solar	energy
systems	in	service	when	they	are	completed,	interconnected	and	placed	in	service.	Initial	direct	costs	related	to	customer	solar	energy	system	agreement
acquisition	costs	are	capitalized	and	amortized	over	the	term	of	the	related	customer	agreements.
Property,	Plant	and	Equipment,	Net
Property,	plant	and	equipment,	net,	including	leasehold	improvements,	are	recognized	at	cost	less	accumulated	depreciation.	Depreciation	is
generally	computed	using	the	straight-line	method	over	the	estimated	useful	lives	of	the	respective	assets,	as	follows:
Machinery,	equipment,	vehicles	and	office	furniture
3
	to	
15
	years
Tooling
4
	to	
7
	years
Building	and	building	improvements
15
	to	
30
	years
Computer	equipment	and	software
3
	to	
10
	years
Leasehold	improvements	are	depreciated	on	a	straight-line	basis	over	the	shorter	of	their	estimated	useful	lives	or	the	terms	of	the	related	leases.
Upon	the	retirement	or	sale	of	our	property,	plant	and	equipment,	the	cost	and	associated	accumulated	depreciation	are	removed	from	the
consolidated	balance	sheet,	and	the	resulting	gain	or	loss	is	reflected	on	the	consolidated	statement	of	operations.	Maintenance	and	repair	expenditures
are	expensed	as	incurred	while	major	improvements	that	increase	the	functionality,	output	or	expected	life	of	an	asset	are	capitalized	and	depreciated
ratably	over	the	identified	useful	life.
65Interest	expense	on	outstanding	debt	is	capitalized	during	the	period	of	significant	capital	asset	construction.	Capitalized	interest	on	construction	in
progress	is	included	within	Property,	plant	and	equipment,	net	and	is	amortized	over	the	life	of	the	related	assets.
Long-Lived	Assets	Including	Acquired	Intangible	Assets
We	review	our	property,	plant	and	equipment,	solar	energy	systems,	long-term	prepayments	and	intangible	assets	for	impairment	whenever	events
or	changes	in	circumstances	indicate	that	the	carrying	amount	of	an	asset	(or	asset	group)	may	not	be	recoverable.	We	measure	recoverability	by
comparing	the	carrying	amount	to	the	future	undiscounted	cash	flows	that	the	asset	is	expected	to	generate.	If	the	asset	is	not	recoverable,	its	carrying
amount	would	be	adjusted	down	to	its	fair	value.	For	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023,	2022	and	2021,	we	have	recognized	no	material	impairments
of	our	long-lived	assets.
Intangible	assets	with	definite	lives	are	amortized	on	a	straight-line	basis	over	their	estimated	useful	lives,	which	range	from	
seven
	to	
thirty	years
.
Goodwill
We	assess	goodwill	for	impairment	annually	in	the	fourth	quarter,	or	more	frequently	if	events	or	changes	in	circumstances	indicate	that	it	might	be
impaired,	by	comparing	its	carrying	value	to	the	reporting	unit’s	fair	value.
	For	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023,	2022,	and	2021,	we	did	
no
t
recognize	any	impairment	of	goodwill.
Capitalization	of	Software	Costs
We	capitalize	costs	incurred	in	the	development	of	internal	use	software,	during	the	application	development	stage	to	Property,	plant	and
equipment,	net	on	the	consolidated	balance	sheets.	Costs	related	to	preliminary	project	activities	and	post-implementation	activities	are	expensed	as
incurred.	Such	costs	are	amortized	on	a	straight-line	basis	over	their	estimated	useful	life	of	
three
	to	
five	years
.
Software	development	costs	incurred	in	development	of	software	to	be	sold,	leased,	or	otherwise	marketed,	incurred	subsequent	to	the
establishment	of	technological	feasibility	and	prior	to	the	general	availability	of	the	software	are	capitalized	when	they	are	expected	to	become
significant.	Such	costs	are	amortized	over	the	estimated	useful	life	of	the	applicable	software	once	it	is	made	generally	available	to	our	customers.
We	evaluate	the	useful	lives	of	these	assets	on	an	annual	basis,	and	we	test	for	impairment	whenever	events	or	changes	in	circumstances	occur
that	could	impact	the	recoverability	of	these	assets.
	For	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023,	2022,	and	2021,	we	have	recognized	no	impairments	of
capitalized	software	costs.
Foreign	Currency
We	determine	the	functional	and	reporting	currency	of	each	of	our	international	subsidiaries	and	their	operating	divisions	based	on	the	primary
currency	in	which	they	operate.	In	cases	where	the	functional	currency	is	not	the	U.S.	dollar,	we	recognize	a	cumulative	translation	adjustment	created	by
the	different	rates	we	apply	to	current	period	income	or	loss	and	the	balance	sheet.	For	each	subsidiary,	we	apply	the	monthly	average	functional
exchange	rate	to	its	monthly	income	or	loss	and	the	month-end	functional	currency	rate	to	translate	the	balance	sheet.
Foreign	currency	transaction	gains	and	losses	are	a	result	of	the	effect	of	exchange	rate	changes	on	transactions	denominated	in	currencies	other
than	the	functional	currency	of	the	respective	subsidiary.	Transaction	gains	and	losses	are	recognized	in	Other	income	(expense),	net,	in	the	consolidated
statements	of	operations.
	For	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023,	2022	and	2021,	we	recorded	a	net	foreign	currency	transaction	gain	of	$
122
	million,
loss	of	$
89
	million	and	gain	of	$
97
	million,	respectively.
66Warranties
We	provide	a	manufacturer’s	warranty	on	all	new	and	used	vehicles	and	a	warranty	on	the	installation	and	components	of	the	energy	generation
and	storage	systems	we	sell	for	periods	typically	between	
10
	to	
25
	years.	We	accrue	a	warranty	reserve	for	the	products	sold	by	us,	which	includes	our
best	estimate	of	the	projected	costs	to	repair	or	replace	items	under	warranties	and	recalls	if	identified.	These	estimates	are	based	on	actual	claims
incurred	to	date	and	an	estimate	of	the	nature,	frequency	and	costs	of	future	claims.	These	estimates	are	inherently	uncertain	and	changes	to	our
historical	or	projected	warranty	experience	may	cause	material	changes	to	the	warranty	reserve	in	the	future.	The	warranty	reserve	does	not	include
projected	warranty	costs	associated	with	our	vehicles	subject	to	operating	lease	accounting	and	our	solar	energy	systems	under	lease	contracts	or	PPAs,
as	the	costs	to	repair	these	warranty	claims	are	expensed	as	incurred.	The	portion	of	the	warranty	reserve	expected	to	be	incurred	within	the	next	12
months	is	included	within	Accrued	liabilities	and	other,	while	the	remaining	balance	is	included	within	Other	long-term	liabilities	on	the	consolidated
balance	sheets.	For	liabilities	that	we	are	entitled	to	receive	indemnification	from	our	suppliers,	we	record	receivables	for	the	contractually	obligated
amounts	on	the	consolidated	balance	sheets	as	a	component	of	Prepaid	expenses	and	other	current	assets	for	the	current	portion	and	as	Other	non-
current	assets	for	the	long-term	portion.	Warranty	expense	is	recorded	as	a	component	of	Cost	of	revenues	in	the	consolidated	statements	of	operations.
Due	to	the	magnitude	of	our	automotive	business,	our	accrued	warranty	balance	is	primarily	related	to	our	automotive	segment.
	
Accrued	warranty
activity	consisted	of	the	following	(in	millions):
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
2021
Accrued	warranty—beginning	of	period
$
3,505
	
$
2,101
	
$
1,468
	
Warranty	costs	incurred
(
1,225
)
(
803
)
(
525
)
Net	changes	in	liability	for	pre-existing	warranties,	including	expirations	and	foreign
exchange	impact
539
	
522
	
102
	
Provision	for	warranty
2,333
	
1,685
	
1,056
	
Accrued	warranty—end	of	period
$
5,152
	
$
3,505
	
$
2,101
	
Customer	Deposits
Customer	deposits	primarily	consist	of	refundable	cash	payments	from	customers	at	the	time	they	place	an	order	or	reservation	for	a	vehicle	or	an
energy	product	and	any	additional	payments	up	to	the	point	of	delivery	or	the	completion	of	installation.	Customer	deposits	also	include	prepayments	on
contracts	that	can	be	cancelled	without	significant	penalties,	such	as	vehicle	maintenance	plans.	Customer	deposits	are	included	in	Accrued	liabilities	and
other	on	the	consolidated	balance	sheets	until	refunded,	forfeited	or	applied	towards	the	customer’s	purchase	balance.
Government	Assistance	Programs	and	Incentives
Globally,	the	operation	of	our	business	is	impacted	by	various	government	programs,	incentives,	and	other	arrangements.	Government	incentives
are	recorded	in	our	consolidated	financial	statements	in	accordance	with	their	purpose	as	a	reduction	of	expense,	or	an	offset	to	the	related	capital	asset.
The	benefit	is	generally	recorded	when	all	conditions	attached	to	the	incentive	have	been	met	or	are	expected	to	be	met	and	there	is	reasonable
assurance	of	their	receipt.
The	IRA	Incentives
On	August	16,	2022,	the	IRA	was	enacted	into	law	and	is	effective	for	taxable	years	beginning	after	December	31,	2022.	The	IRA	includes	multiple
incentives	to	promote	clean	energy,	electric	vehicles,	battery	and	energy	storage	manufacture	or	purchase,	in	addition	to	a	new	corporate	alternative
minimum	tax	of	15%	on	adjusted	financial	statement	income	of	corporations	with	profits	greater	than	$1	billion.	Some	of	these	measures	are	expected	to
materially	affect	our	consolidated	financial	statements.	For	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023,	the	impact	from	our	IRA	incentive	was	primarily	a
reduction	of	our	material	costs	in	our	consolidated	statement	of	operations.	We	will	continue	to	evaluate	the	effects	of	the	IRA	as	more	guidance	is	issued
and	the	relevant	implications	to	our	consolidated	financial	statements.
67Gigafactory	New	York—New	York	State	Investment	and	Lease
We	have	a	lease	through	the	Research	Foundation	for	the	SUNY	Foundation	with	respect	to	Gigafactory	New	York.	Under	the	lease	and	a	related
research	and	development	agreement,	we	are	continuing	to	designate	further	buildouts	at	the	facility.	We	are	required	to	comply	with	certain	covenants,
including	hiring	and	cumulative	investment	targets.	Under	the	terms	of	the	arrangement,	the	SUNY	Foundation	paid	for	a	majority	of	the	construction
costs	related	to	the	manufacturing	facility	and	the	acquisition	and	commissioning	of	certain	manufacturing	equipment;	and	we	are	responsible	for	any
construction	or	equipment	costs	in	excess	of	such	amount	(refer	to	Note	15,	
Commitments	and	Contingencies
).	This	incentive	reduces	the	related	lease
costs	of	the	facility	within	the	Energy	generation	and	storage	cost	of	revenues	and	operating	expense	line	items	in	our	consolidated	statements	of
operations.
Gigafactory	Shanghai—Land	Use	Rights	and	Economic	Benefits
We	have	an	agreement	with	the	local	government	of	Shanghai	for	land	use	rights	at	Gigafactory	Shanghai.	Under	the	terms	of	the	arrangement,	we
are	required	to	meet	a	cumulative	capital	expenditure	target	and	an	annual	tax	revenue	target	starting	at	the	end	of	2023.	In	addition,	the	Shanghai
government	has	granted	to	our	Gigafactory	Shanghai	subsidiary	certain	incentives	to	be	used	in	connection	with	eligible	capital	investments	at
Gigafactory	Shanghai	(refer	to	Note	15,	
Commitments	and	Contingencies
).	For	the	year	ended	December	31,	2022,	we	received	grant	funding	of	$
76
million.	These	incentives	offset	the	related	costs	of	our	facilities	and	are	recorded	as	a	reduction	of	the	cost	of	the	capital	investment	within	the	Property,
plant	and	equipment,	net	line	item	in	our	consolidated	balance	sheets.	The	incentive	therefore	reduces	the	depreciation	expense	over	the	useful	lives	of
the	related	equipment.
Nevada	Tax	Incentives
In	connection	with	the	construction	of	Gigafactory	Nevada,	we	entered	into	agreements	with	the	State	of	Nevada	and	Storey	County	in	Nevada	that
provide	abatements	for	specified	taxes,	discounts	to	the	base	tariff	energy	rates	and	transferable	tax	credits	of	up	to	$
195
	million	in	consideration	of
capital	investment	and	hiring	targets	that	were	met	at	Gigafactory	Nevada.
Gigafactory	Texas	Tax	Incentives
In	connection	with	the	construction	of	Gigafactory	Texas,	we	entered	into	a	
20-year
	agreement	with	Travis	County	in	Texas	pursuant	to	which	we
would	receive	grant	funding	equal	to	
70
-
80
%	of	property	taxes	paid	by	us	to	Travis	County	and	a	separate	
10-year
	agreement	with	the	Del	Valle
Independent	School	District	in	Texas	pursuant	to	which	a	portion	of	the	taxable	value	of	our	property	would	be	capped	at	a	specified	amount,	in	each	case
subject	to	our	meeting	certain	minimum	economic	development	metrics	through	our	construction	and	operations	at	Gigafactory	Texas.	This	incentive	is
recorded	as	a	reduction	of	the	related	expenses	within	the	Cost	of	automotive	revenues	and	operating	expense	line	items	of	our	consolidated	statements
of	operations.
	As	of	December	31,	2023,	the	grant	funding	related	to	property	taxes	paid	were	immaterial.
Defined	Contribution	Plan
We	have	a	401(k)	savings	plan	in	the	U.S.	that	is	intended	to	qualify	as	a	deferred	salary	arrangement	under	Section	401(k)	of	the	Internal	Revenue
Code	and	a	number	of	savings	plans	internationally.	Under	the	401(k)	savings	plan,	participating	employees	may	elect	to	contribute	up	to	
90
%	of	their
eligible	compensation,	subject	to	certain	limitations.	Beginning	in	January	2022,	we	began	to	match	
50
%	of	each	employee’s	contributions	up	to	a
maximum	of	
6
%	(capped	at	$
3,000
)	of	the	employee’s	eligible	compensation,	vested	upon	one	year	of	service.
	During	the	years	ended	December	31,
2023	and	2022,	we	recognized	$
99
	million	and	$
91
	million,	respectively,	of	expenses	related	to	employer	contributions	for	the	401(k)	savings	plan.
68Recent	Accounting	Pronouncements
Recently	issued	accounting	pronouncements	not	yet	adopted
In	November	2023,	the	Financial	Accounting	Standards	Board	(“FASB”)	issued	ASU	No.	2023-07,	Improvements	to	Reportable	Segment	Disclosures
(Topic	280).	This	ASU	updates	reportable	segment	disclosure	requirements	by	requiring	disclosures	of	significant	reportable	segment	expenses	that	are
regularly	provided	to	the	Chief	Operating	Decision	Maker	(“CODM”)	and	included	within	each	reported	measure	of	a	segment's	profit	or	loss.	This	ASU	also
requires	disclosure	of	the	title	and	position	of	the	individual	identified	as	the	CODM	and	an	explanation	of	how	the	CODM	uses	the	reported	measures	of	a
segment’s	profit	or	loss	in	assessing	segment	performance	and	deciding	how	to	allocate	resources.	The	ASU	is	effective	for	annual	periods	beginning	after
December	15,	2023,	and	interim	periods	within	fiscal	years	beginning	after	December	15,	2024.	Adoption	of	the	ASU	should	be	applied	retrospectively	to
all	prior	periods	presented	in	the	financial	statements.	Early	adoption	is	also	permitted.	This	ASU	will	likely	result	in	us	including	the	additional	required
disclosures	when	adopted.
	
We	are	currently	evaluating	the	provisions	of	this	ASU	and	expect	to	adopt	them	for	the	year	ending	December	31,	2024.
In	December	2023,	the	FASB	issued	ASU	No.	2023-08,	Accounting	for	and	Disclosure	of	Crypto	Assets	(Subtopic	350-60).	This	ASU	requires	certain
crypto	assets	to	be	measured	at	fair	value	separately	in	the	balance	sheet	and	income	statement	each	reporting	period.	This	ASU	also	enhances	the	other
intangible	asset	disclosure	requirements	by	requiring	the	name,	cost	basis,	fair	value,	and	number	of	units	for	each	significant	crypto	holding.	The	ASU	is
effective	for	annual	periods	beginning	after	December	15,	2024,	including	interim	periods	within	those	fiscal	years.	Adoption	of	the	ASU	requires	a
cumulative-effect	adjustment	to	the	opening	balance	of	retained	earnings	as	of	the	beginning	of	the	annual	reporting	period	in	which	an	entity	adopts	the
amendments.	Early	adoption	is	also	permitted,	including	adoption	in	an	interim	period.	However,	if	the	ASU	is	early	adopted	in	an	interim	period,	an	entity
must	adopt	the	ASU	as	of	the	beginning	of	the	fiscal	year	that	includes	the	interim	period.	This	ASU	will	result	in	gains	and	losses	recorded	in	the
consolidated	financial	statements	of	operations	and	additional	disclosures	when	adopted.
	
We	are	currently	evaluating	the	adoption	of	this	ASU	and	it	will
affect	the	carrying	value	of	our	crypto	assets	held	and	the	gains	and	losses	relating	thereto,	once	adopted.
In	December	2023,	the	FASB	issued	ASU	No.	2023-09,	Improvements	to	Income	Tax	Disclosures	(Topic	740).	The	ASU	requires	disaggregated
information	about	a	reporting	entity’s	effective	tax	rate	reconciliation	as	well	as	additional	information	on	income	taxes	paid.	The	ASU	is	effective	on	a
prospective	basis	for	annual	periods	beginning	after	December	15,	2024.	Early	adoption	is	also	permitted	for	annual	financial	statements	that	have	not
yet	been	issued	or	made	available	for	issuance.	This	ASU	will	result	in	the	required	additional	disclosures	being	included	in	our	consolidated	financial
statements,	once	adopted.
Recently	adopted	accounting	pronouncements
In	October	2021,	the	FASB	issued	ASU	No.	2021-08,	Accounting	for	Contract	Assets	and	Contract	Liabilities	from	Contracts	with	Customers	(Topic
805).	This	ASU	requires	an	acquirer	in	a	business	combination	to	recognize	and	measure	contract	assets	and	contract	liabilities	(deferred	revenue)	from
acquired	contracts	using	the	revenue	recognition	guidance	in	Topic	606.	At	the	acquisition	date,	the	acquirer	applies	the	revenue	model	as	if	it	had
originated	the	acquired	contracts.	The	ASU	is	effective	for	annual	periods	beginning	after	December	15,	2022,	including	interim	periods	within	those	fiscal
years.	We	adopted	this	ASU	prospectively	on	January	1,	2023.	This	ASU	has	not	and	is	currently	not	expected	to	have	a	material	impact	on	our
consolidated	financial	statements.
In	March	2022,	the	FASB	issued	ASU	2022-02,	Troubled	Debt	Restructurings	and	Vintage	Disclosures.	This	ASU	eliminates	the	accounting	guidance
for	troubled	debt	restructurings	by	creditors	that	have	adopted	ASU	2016-13,	Measurement	of	Credit	Losses	on	Financial	Instruments,	which	we	adopted
on	January	1,	2020.	This	ASU	also	enhances	the	disclosure	requirements	for	certain	loan	refinancing	and	restructurings	by	creditors	when	a	borrower	is
experiencing	financial	difficulty.	In	addition,	the	ASU	amends	the	guidance	on	vintage	disclosures	to	require	entities	to	disclose	current	period	gross	write-
offs	by	year	of	origination	for	financing	receivables	and	net	investments	in	leases	within	the	scope	of	ASC	326-20.	The	ASU	is	effective	for	annual	periods
beginning	after	December	15,	2022,	including	interim	periods	within	those	fiscal	years.	We	adopted	the	ASU	prospectively	on	January	1,	2023.	This	ASU
has	not	and	is	currently	not	expected	to	have	a	material	impact	on	our	consolidated	financial	statements.
69ASU	2020-06
In	August	2020,	the	FASB	issued	ASU	2020-06,	Accounting	for	Convertible	Instruments	and	Contracts	in	an	Entity’s	Own	Equity.	The	ASU	simplifies
the	accounting	for	convertible	instruments	by	removing	certain	separation	models	in	ASC	470-20,	Debt—Debt	with	Conversion	and	Other	Options,	for
convertible	instruments.	The	ASU	updates	the	guidance	on	certain	embedded	conversion	features	that	are	not	required	to	be	accounted	for	as	derivatives
under	Topic	815,	Derivatives	and	Hedging,	or	that	do	not	result	in	substantial	premiums	accounted	for	as	paid-in	capital,	such	that	those	features	are	no
longer	required	to	be	separated	from	the	host	contract.	The	convertible	debt	instruments	will	be	accounted	for	as	a	single	liability	measured	at	amortized
cost.	This	will	also	result	in	the	interest	expense	recognized	for	convertible	debt	instruments	to	be	typically	closer	to	the	coupon	interest	rate	when
applying	the	guidance	in	Topic	835,	Interest.	Further,	the	ASU	made	amendments	to	the	EPS	guidance	in	Topic	260	for	convertible	debt	instruments,	the
most	significant	impact	of	which	is	requiring	the	use	of	the	if-converted	method	for	diluted	EPS	calculation,	and	no	longer	allowing	the	net	share
settlement	method.	The	ASU	also	made	revisions	to	Topic	815-40,	which	provides	guidance	on	how	an	entity	must	determine	whether	a	contract	qualifies
for	a	scope	exception	from	derivative	accounting.	The	amendments	to	Topic	815-40	change	the	scope	of	contracts	that	are	recognized	as	assets	or
liabilities.
On	January	1,	2021,	we	adopted	the	ASU	using	the	modified	retrospective	method.	We	recognized	a	favorable	$
211
	million	cumulative	effect	of
initially	applying	the	ASU	as	an	adjustment	to	the	January	1,	2021	opening	balance	of	accumulated	deficit.	Due	to	the	recombination	of	the	equity
conversion	component	of	our	convertible	debt	remaining	outstanding,	additional	paid	in	capital	was	reduced	by	$
474
	million	and	convertible	senior	notes
(mezzanine	equity)	was	reduced	by	$
51
	million.	The	removal	of	the	remaining	debt	discounts	recorded	for	this	previous	separation	had	the	effect	of
increasing	our	net	debt	balance	by	$
269
	million	and	we	reduced	property,	plant	and	equipment	by	$
45
	million	related	to	previously	capitalized	interest.
The	prior	period	consolidated	financial	statements	have	not	been	retrospectively	adjusted	and	continue	to	be	reported	under	the	accounting	standards	in
effect	for	those	periods.
Note	3	–	
Digital	Assets,	Net
During	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023	and	2022,	we	purchased	and/or	received	immaterial	amounts	of	digital	assets.	During	the	year	ended
December	31,	2023,	we	recorded	an	
immaterial
	amount	of	impairment	losses	on	digital	assets.	During	the	year	ended	December	31,	2022,	we	recorded
$
204
	million	of	impairment	losses	on	digital	assets	and	realized	gains	of	$
64
	million	in	connection	with	converting	our	holdings	of	digital	assets	into	fiat
currency.	The	gains	are	presented	net	of	impairment	losses	in	Restructuring	and	other	in	the	consolidated	statements	of	operations.	As	of	December	31,
2023	and	2022,	the	carrying	value	of	our	digital	assets	held	reflects	cumulative	impairment	of	$
204
	million.
Note	4	–	
Goodwill	and	Intangible	Assets
Goodwill	increased	$
59
	million	within	the	automotive	segment	from	$
194
	million	as	of	December	31,	2022	to	$
253
	million	as	of	December	31,	2023
primarily	from	a	business	combination,	net	of	the	impact	of	a	divestiture.	There	were	
no
	accumulated	impairment	losses	as	of	December	31,	2023	and
2022.
The	net	carrying	value	of	our	intangible	assets	decreased	from	$
215
	million	as	of	December	31,	2022	to	$
178
	million	as	of	December	31,	2023
mainly	from	amortization.
Note	5	–	
Fair	Value	of	Financial	Instruments
ASC	820,	
Fair	Value	Measurements
	(“ASC	820”)	states	that	fair	value	is	an	exit	price,	representing	the	amount	that	would	be	received	to	sell	an
asset	or	paid	to	transfer	a	liability	in	an	orderly	transaction	between	market	participants.	As	such,	fair	value	is	a	market-based	measurement	that	should
be	determined	based	on	assumptions	that	market	participants	would	use	in	pricing	an	asset	or	a	liability.	The	three-tiered	fair	value	hierarchy,	which
prioritizes	which	inputs	should	be	used	in	measuring	fair	value,	is	comprised	of:	(Level	I)	observable	inputs	such	as	quoted	prices	in	active	markets;	(Level
II)	inputs	other	than	quoted	prices	in	active	markets	that	are	observable	either	directly	or	indirectly	and	(Level	III)	unobservable	inputs	for	which	there	is
little	or	no	market	data.	The	fair	value	hierarchy	requires	the	use	of	observable	market	data	when	available	in	determining	fair	value.	
Our	assets	and
liabilities	that	were	measured	at	fair	value	on	a	recurring	basis	were	as	follows	(in	millions):
70	
December	31,	2023
December	31,	2022
	
Fair	Value
Level	I
Level	II
Level	III
Fair	Value
Level	I
Level	II
Level	III
Money	market	funds
$
109
	
$
109
	
$
—
	
$
—
	
$
2,188
	
$
2,188
	
$
—
	
$
—
	
U.S.	government	securities
5,136
	
—
	
5,136
	
—
	
894
	
—
	
894
	
—
	
Corporate	debt	securities
480
	
—
	
480
	
—
	
885
	
—
	
885
	
—
	
Certificates	of	deposit	and	time
deposits
6,996
	
—
	
6,996
	
—
	
4,253
	
—
	
4,253
	
—
	
Commercial	paper
470
	
—
	
470
	
—
	
—
	
—
	
—
	
—
	
Total
$
13,191
	
$
109
	
$
13,082
	
$
—
	
$
8,220
	
$
2,188
	
$
6,032
	
$
—
	
All	of	our	money	market	funds	were	classified	within	Level	I	of	the	fair	value	hierarchy	because	they	were	valued	using	quoted	prices	in	active
markets.	Our	U.S.	government	securities,	certificates	of	deposit,	commercial	paper,	time	deposits	and	corporate	debt	securities	are	classified	within	Level
II	of	the	fair	value	hierarchy	and	the	market	approach	was	used	to	determine	fair	value	of	these	investments.
Our	cash,	cash	equivalents	and	investments	classified	by	security	type	as	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022	consisted	of	the	following	(in	millions):
	
December	31,	2023
	
Adjusted	Cost
Gross
Unrealized
Gains
Gross
Unrealized
Losses
Fair	Value
Cash	and	Cash
Equivalents
Short-Term
Investments
Cash
$
15,903
	
$
—
	
$
—
	
$
15,903
	
$
15,903
	
$
—
	
Money	market	funds
109
	
—
	
—
	
109
	
109
	
—
	
U.S.	government	securities
5,136
	
1
	
(
1
)
5,136
	
277
	
4,859
	
Corporate	debt	securities
485
	
1
	
(
6
)
480
	
—
	
480
	
Certificates	of	deposit	and	time	deposits
6,995
	
1
	
—
	
6,996
	
—
	
6,996
	
Commercial	paper
470
	
—
	
—
	
470
	
109
	
361
	
Total	cash,	cash	equivalents	and	short-term
investments
$
29,098
	
$
3
	
$
(
7
)
$
29,094
	
$
16,398
	
$
12,696
	
	
December	31,	2022
	
Adjusted	Cost
Gross
Unrealized
Gains
Gross
Unrealized
Losses
Fair	Value
Cash	and	Cash
Equivalents
Short-Term
Investments
Cash
$
13,965
	
$
—
	
$
—
	
$
13,965
	
$
13,965
	
$
—
	
Money	market	funds
2,188
	
—
	
—
	
2,188
	
2,188
	
—
	
U.S.	government	securities
897
	
—
	
(
3
)
894
	
—
	
894
	
Corporate	debt	securities
907
	
—
	
(
22
)
885
	
—
	
885
	
Certificates	of	deposit	and	time	deposits
4,252
	
1
	
—
	
4,253
	
100
	
4,153
	
Total	cash,	cash	equivalents	and	short-term
investments
$
22,209
	
$
1
	
$
(
25
)
$
22,185
	
$
16,253
	
$
5,932
	
We	record	gross	realized	gains,	losses	and	credit	losses	as	a	component	of	Other	income	(expense),	net	in	the	consolidated	statements	of
operations.	For	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023	and	2022,	we	did	not	recognize	any	material	gross	realized	gains,	losses	or	credit	losses.	The	ending
allowance	balances	for	credit	losses	were	immaterial	as	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022.	We	have	determined	that	the	gross	unrealized	losses	on	our
investments	as	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022	were	temporary	in	nature.
71The	following	table	summarizes	the	fair	value	of	our	investments	by	stated	contractual	maturities	as	of	December	31,	2023	(in	millions):
Due	in	1	year	or	less
$
12,374
	
Due	in	1	year	through	5	years
297
	
Due	in	5	years	through	10	years
25
	
Total
$
12,696
	
Disclosure	of	Fair	Values
Our	financial	instruments	that	are	not	re-measured	at	fair	value	include	accounts	receivable,	financing	receivables,	other	receivables,	digital	assets,
accounts	payable,	accrued	liabilities,	customer	deposits	and	debt.	The	carrying	values	of	these	financial	instruments	materially	approximate	their	fair
values,	other	than	our	
2.00
%	Convertible	Senior	Notes	due	in	
2024
	(“2024	Notes”)	and	digital	assets.
We	estimate	the	fair	value	of	the	2024	Notes	using	commonly	accepted	valuation	methodologies	and	market-based	risk	measurements	that	are
indirectly	observable,	such	as	credit	risk	(Level	II).	In	addition,	we	estimate	the	fair	values	of	our	digital	assets	based	on	quoted	prices	in	active	markets
(Level	I).	
The	following	table	presents	the	estimated	fair	values	and	the	carrying	values	(in	millions):
	
December	31,	2023
December	31,	2022
	
Carrying	Value
Fair	Value
Carrying	Value
Fair	Value
2024	Notes
$
37
	
$
443
	
$
37
	
$
223
	
Digital	assets,	net
$
184
	
$
487
	
$
184
	
$
191
	
Note	6	–	
Inventory
Our	inventory	consisted	of	the	following	(in	millions):
	
December	31,
2023
December	31,
2022
Raw	materials
$
5,390
	
$
6,137
	
Work	in	process
2,016
	
2,385
	
Finished	goods	(1)
5,049
	
3,475
	
Service	parts
1,171
	
842
	
Total
$
13,626
	
$
12,839
	
(1)
Finished	goods	inventory	includes	products	in	transit	to	fulfill	customer	orders,	new	vehicles	available	for	sale,	used	vehicles	and	energy	products
available	for	sale.
We	write-down	inventory	for	any	excess	or	obsolete	inventories	or	when	we	believe	that	the	net	realizable	value	of	inventories	is	less	than	the
carrying	value.	During	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023,	2022	and	2021	we	recorded	write-downs	of	$
233
	million,	$
144
	million	and	$
106
	million,
respectively,	in	Cost	of	revenues	in	the	consolidated	statements	of	operations.
72Note	7	–	
Solar	Energy	Systems,	Net
Our	solar	energy	systems,	net,	consisted	of	the	following	(in	millions):
December	31,
2023
December	31,
2022
Solar	energy	systems	in	service
$
6,755
	
$
6,785
	
Initial	direct	costs	related	to	customer	solar	energy	system	lease	acquisition	costs
104
	
104
	
6,859
	
6,889
	
Less:	accumulated	depreciation	and	amortization	(1)
(
1,643
)
(
1,418
)
5,216
	
5,471
	
Solar	energy	systems	under	construction
1
	
2
	
Solar	energy	systems	pending	interconnection
12
	
16
	
Solar	energy	systems,	net	(2)
$
5,229
	
$
5,489
	
(1)
Depreciation	and	amortization	expense	during	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023,	2022	and	2021	was	$
235
	million,	$
235
	million	and	$
236
million,	respectively.
(2)
As	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022,	there	were	$
740
	million	and	$
802
	million,	respectively,	of	gross	solar	energy	systems	under	lease	pass-through
fund	arrangements	with	accumulated	depreciation	of	$
157
	million	and	$
148
	million,	respectively.
Note	8	–	
Property,	Plant	and	Equipment,	Net
Our	property,	plant	and	equipment,	net,	consisted	of	the	following	(in	millions):
December	31,
2023
December	31,
2022
Machinery,	equipment,	vehicles	and	office	furniture
$
16,372
	
$
13,558
	
Tooling
3,147
	
2,579
	
Leasehold	improvements
3,168
	
2,366
	
Land	and	buildings
9,505
	
7,751
	
Computer	equipment,	hardware	and	software
3,799
	
2,072
	
Construction	in	progress
5,791
	
4,263
	
	
41,782
	
32,589
	
Less:	Accumulated	depreciation
(
12,057
)
(
9,041
)
Total
$
29,725
	
$
23,548
	
Construction	in	progress	is	primarily	comprised	of	ongoing	construction	and	expansion	of	our	facilities,	and	equipment	and	tooling	related	to	the
manufacturing	of	our	products.	Completed	assets	are	transferred	to	their	respective	asset	classes	and	depreciation	begins	when	an	asset	is	ready	for	its
intended	use.
Depreciation	expense	during	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023,	2022	and	2021	was	$
3.33
	billion,	$
2.42
	billion	and	$
1.91
	billion,	respectively.
Panasonic	has	partnered	with	us	on	Gigafactory	Nevada	with	investments	in	the	production	equipment	that	it	uses	to	manufacture	and	supply	us
with	battery	cells.	Under	our	arrangement	with	Panasonic,	we	plan	to	purchase	the	full	output	from	their	production	equipment	at	negotiated	prices.	As
the	terms	of	the	arrangement	convey	a	finance	lease	under	ASC	842,	we	account	for	their	production	equipment	as	leased	assets	when	production
commences.	We	account	for	each	lease	and	any	non-lease	components	associated	with	that	lease	as	a	single	lease	component	for	all	asset	classes,
except	production	equipment	classes	embedded	in	supply	agreements.	This	results	in	us	recording	the	cost	of	their	production	equipment	within	Property,
plant	and	equipment,	net,	on	the	consolidated	balance	sheets	with	a	corresponding	liability	recorded	to	debt	and	finance	leases.	Depreciation	on
Panasonic	production	equipment	is	computed	using	the	units-of-production	method	whereby	capitalized	costs	are	amortized	over	the	total	estimated
productive	life	of	the	respective	assets.	As	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022,	we	had	cumulatively	capitalized	gross	costs	of	$
2.02
	billion	and	$
2.01
	billion,
respectively,	on	the	consolidated	balance	sheets	in	relation	to	the	production	equipment	under	our	Panasonic	arrangement.
73Note	9	–	
Accrued	Liabilities	and	Other
Our	accrued	liabilities	and	other	current	liabilities	consisted	of	the	following	(in	millions):
December	31,
2023
December	31,
2022
Accrued	purchases	(1)
$
2,721
	
$
2,747
	
Accrued	warranty	reserve,	current	portion
1,546
	
1,025
	
Payroll	and	related	costs
1,325
	
1,026
	
Taxes	payable	(2)
1,204
	
1,235
	
Customer	deposits
876
	
1,063
	
Operating	lease	liabilities,	current	portion
672
	
485
	
Sales	return	reserve,	current	portion
219
	
270
	
Other	current	liabilities
517
	
354
	
Total
$
9,080
	
$
8,205
	
(1)
Accrued	purchases	primarily	reflects	receipts	of	goods	and	services	for	which	we	had	not	yet	been	invoiced.	As	we	are	invoiced	for	these	goods	and
services,	this	balance	will	reduce	and	accounts	payable	will	increase.
(2)
Taxes	payable	includes	value	added	tax,	income	tax,	sales	tax,	property	tax	and	use	tax	payables.
Note	10	–	
Other	Long-Term	Liabilities
Our	other	long-term	liabilities	consisted	of	the	following	(in	millions):
December	31,
2023
December	31,
2022
Operating	lease	liabilities
$
3,671
	
$
2,164
	
Accrued	warranty	reserve
3,606
	
2,480
	
Other	non-current	liabilities
876
	
686
	
Total	other	long-term	liabilities
$
8,153
	
$
5,330
	
Note	11	–	
Debt
The	following	is	a	summary	of	our	debt	and	finance	leases	as	of	December	31,	2023	(in	millions):
	
Net	Carrying	Value
Unpaid
Principal
Balance
Unused
Committed
Amount	(1)
Contractual
Interest	Rates
Contractual
Maturity	Date
	
Current
Long-Term
Recourse	debt:
		
	
2024	Notes
$
37
	
$
—
	
$
37
	
$
—
	
2.00
	
%
May	2024
RCF	Credit	Agreement
—
	
—
	
—
	
5,000
	
Not	applicable
January	2028
Solar	Bonds
—
	
7
	
7
	
—
	
4.70
-
5.75
%
March	2025
	-	
January	2031
Other
—
	
—
	
—
	
28
	
Not	applicable
December	2026
Total	recourse	debt
37
	
7
	
44
	
5,028
	
Non-recourse	debt:
Automotive	Asset-backed	Notes
1,906
	
2,337
	
4,259
	
—
	
0.60
-
6.57
%
July	2024
-
May	2031
Solar	Asset-backed	Notes
4
	
8
	
13
	
—
	
4.80
	
%
December	2026
Cash	Equity	Debt
28
	
330
	
367
	
—
	
5.25
-
5.81
%
July	2033
-
January	2035
Total	non-recourse	debt
1,938
	
2,675
	
4,639
	
—
	
Total	debt
1,975
	
2,682
	
$
4,683
	
$
5,028
	
Finance	leases
398
	
175
	
Total	debt	and	finance	leases
$
2,373
	
$
2,857
	
74The	following	is	a	summary	of	our	debt	and	finance	leases	as	of	December	31,	2022	(in	millions):
Net	Carrying	Value
Unpaid
Principal
Balance
Unused
Committed
Amount	(2)
Contractual
Interest	Rates
Contractual
Maturity	Date
Current
Long-Term
Recourse	debt:
		
	
2024	Notes
$
—
	
$
37
	
$
37
	
$
—
	
2.00
	
%
May	2024
Credit	Agreement
—
	
—
	
—
	
2,266
	
Not	applicable
July	2023
Solar	Bonds
—
	
7
	
7
	
—
	
4.70
-
5.75
%
March	2025
	-	
January	2031
Total	recourse	debt
—
	
44
	
44
	
2,266
	
Non-recourse	debt:
Automotive	Asset-backed	Notes
984
	
613
	
1,603
	
—
	
0.36
-
4.64
%
December	2023
-
September	2025
Solar	Asset-backed	Notes
4
	
13
	
17
	
—
	
4.80
	
%
December	2026
Cash	Equity	Debt
28
	
359
	
397
	
—
	
5.25
-
5.81
%
July	2033
-
January	2035
Automotive	Lease-backed	Credit	Facilities
—
	
—
	
—
	
151
	
Not	applicable
September	2024
Total	non-recourse	debt
1,016
	
985
	
2,017
	
151
	
Total	debt
1,016
	
1,029
	
$
2,061
	
$
2,417
	
Finance	leases
486
	
568
	
Total	debt	and	finance	leases
$
1,502
	
$
1,597
	
(1)
There	are	no	restrictions	on	draw-down	or	use	for	general	corporate	purposes	with	respect	to	any	available	committed	funds	under	our	RCF	Credit
Agreement,	except	certain	specified	conditions	prior	to	draw-down.	Refer	to	the	section	below	for	the	terms	of	the	facility.
(2)
There	were	no	restrictions	on	draw-down	or	use	for	general	corporate	purposes	with	respect	to	any	available	committed	funds	under	our	credit
facilities,	except	certain	specified	conditions	prior	to	draw-down,	including	pledging	to	our	lenders	sufficient	amounts	of	qualified	receivables,
inventories,	leased	vehicles	and	our	interests	in	those	leases	or	various	other	assets	as	described	below.
Recourse	debt	refers	to	debt	that	is	recourse	to	our	general	assets.	Non-recourse	debt	refers	to	debt	that	is	recourse	to	only	assets	of	our
subsidiaries.	The	differences	between	the	unpaid	principal	balances	and	the	net	carrying	values	are	due	to	debt	discounts	or	deferred	issuance	costs.	As
of	December	31,	2023,	we	were	in	material	compliance	with	all	financial	debt	covenants.
2024	Notes
The	closing	price	of	our	common	stock	continued	to	exceed	
130
%	of	the	applicable	conversion	price	of	our	2024	Notes	on	at	least	
20
	of	the	last	
30
consecutive	trading	days	of	each	quarter	in	2023,	causing	the	2024	Notes	to	be	convertible	by	their	holders	in	the	subsequent	quarter.	As	of	December
31,	2023,	the	if-converted	value	of	the	notes	exceeds	the	outstanding	principal	amount	by	$
406
	million.	Upon	conversion,	the	2024	Notes	will	be	settled
in	cash,	shares	of	our	common	stock	or	a	combination	thereof,	at	our	election.
Credit	Agreement
In	June	2015,	we	entered	into	a	senior	asset-based	revolving	credit	agreement	(as	amended	from	time	to	time,	the	“Credit	Agreement”)	with	a
syndicate	of	banks.	Borrowed	funds	bear	interest,	at	our	option,	at	an	annual	rate	of	(a)	
1
%	plus	LIBOR	or	(b)	the	highest	of	(i)	the	federal	funds	rate	plus
0.50
%,	(ii)	the	lenders’	“prime	rate”	or	(iii)	
1
%	plus	LIBOR.	The	fee	for	undrawn	amounts	is	
0.25
%	per	annum.	The	Credit	Agreement	is	secured	by	certain
of	our	accounts	receivable,	inventory	and	equipment.	Availability	under	the	Credit	Agreement	is	based	on	the	value	of	such	assets,	as	reduced	by	certain
reserves.
In	January	2023,	we	entered	into	a	
5-year
	senior	unsecured	revolving	credit	facility	(the	“RCF	Credit	Agreement”)	with	a	syndicate	of	banks	to
replace	the	existing	Credit	Agreement,	which	was	terminated.	The	RCF	Credit	Agreement	contains	
two
	optional	
one-year
	extensions	and	has	a	total
commitment	of	up	to	$
5.00
	billion,	which	could	be	increased	up	to	$
7.00
	billion	under	certain	circumstances.	The	underlying	borrowings	may	be	used	for
general	corporate	purposes.	Borrowed	funds	accrue	interest	at	a	variable	rate	equal	to:	(i)	for	dollar-denominated	loans,	at	our	election,	(a)	Term	SOFR
(the	forward-looking	secured	overnight	financing	rate)	plus	
0.10
%,	or	(b)	an	alternate	base	rate;	(ii)	for	loans	denominated	in	pounds	sterling,	SONIA	(the
sterling	overnight	index	average	reference	rate);	or	(iii)	for	loans	denominated	in	euros,	an	adjusted	EURIBOR	(euro	interbank	offered	rate);	in	each	case,
plus	an	applicable	margin.	The	applicable	margin	will	be	based	on	the	rating	assigned	to	our	senior,	unsecured	long-term	indebtedness	(the	“Credit
Rating”)	from	time	to	time.	The	fee	for	undrawn	amounts	is	variable	based	on	the	Credit	Rating	and	is	currently	
0.125
%	per	annum.
75Automotive	Asset-backed	Notes
From	time	to	time,	we	transfer	receivables	and/or	beneficial	interests	related	to	certain	vehicles	(either	leased	or	financed)	into	special	purpose
entities	(“SPEs”)	and	issue	Automotive	Asset-backed	Notes,	backed	by	these	automotive	assets	to	investors.	The	SPEs	are	consolidated	in	the	financial
statements.	The	cash	flows	generated	by	these	automotive	assets	are	used	to	service	the	principal	and	interest	payments	on	the	Automotive	Asset-
backed	Notes	and	satisfy	the	SPEs’	expenses,	and	any	remaining	cash	is	distributed	to	the	owners	of	the	SPEs.	We	recognize	revenue	earned	from	the
associated	customer	lease	or	financing	contracts	in	accordance	with	our	revenue	recognition	policy.	The	SPEs’	assets	and	cash	flows	are	not	available	to
our	other	creditors,	and	the	creditors	of	the	SPEs,	including	the	Automotive	Asset-backed	Note	holders,	have	no	recourse	to	our	other	assets.
In	2023,	we	transferred	beneficial	interests	related	to	certain	leased	vehicles	and	financing	receivables	into	SPEs	and	issued	$
3.93
	billion	in
aggregate	principal	amount	of	Automotive	Asset-backed	Notes,	with	terms	similar	to	our	other	previously	issued	Automotive	Asset-backed	Notes.	The
proceeds	from	the	issuance,	net	of	debt	issuance	costs,	were	$
3.92
	billion.
Cash	Equity	Debt
In	connection	with	the	cash	equity	financing	deals	closed	in	2016,	our	subsidiaries	issued	$
502
	million	in	aggregate	principal	amount	of	debt	that
bears	interest	at	fixed	rates.	This	debt	is	secured	by,	among	other	things,	our	interests	in	certain	financing	funds	and	is	non-recourse	to	our	other	assets.
Automotive	Lease-backed	Credit	Facilities
In	the	third	quarter	of	2023,	we	terminated	our	Automotive	Lease-backed	Credit	Facilities	and	the	previously	committed	funds	are	no	longer
available	for	future	borrowings.
Pledged	Assets
As	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022,	we	had	pledged	or	restricted	$
4.64
	billion	and	$
2.02
	billion	of	our	assets	(consisting	principally	of	operating
lease	vehicles,	financing	receivables,	restricted	cash,	and	equity	interests	in	certain	SPEs)	as	collateral	for	our	outstanding	debt.
Schedule	of	Principal	Maturities	of	Debt
The	future	scheduled	principal	maturities	of	debt	as	of	December	31,	2023	were	as	follows	(in	millions):
Recourse	debt
Non-recourse	debt
Total
2024
$
37
	
$
1,941
	
$
1,978
	
2025
4
	
1,663
	
1,667
	
2026
—
	
494
	
494
	
2027
—
	
276
	
276
	
2028
—
	
44
	
44
	
Thereafter
3
	
221
	
224
	
Total
$
44
	
$
4,639
	
$
4,683
	
Note	12	–	
Leases
We	have	entered	into	various	operating	and	finance	lease	agreements	for	certain	of	our	offices,	manufacturing	and	warehouse	facilities,	retail	and
service	locations,	data	centers,	equipment,	vehicles,	and	solar	energy	systems,	worldwide.	We	determine	if	an	arrangement	is	a	lease,	or	contains	a
lease,	at	inception	and	record	the	leases	in	our	financial	statements	upon	lease	commencement,	which	is	the	date	when	the	underlying	asset	is	made
available	for	use	by	the	lessor.
We	have	lease	agreements	with	lease	and	non-lease	components,	and	have	elected	to	utilize	the	practical	expedient	to	account	for	lease	and	non-
lease	components	together	as	a	single	combined	lease	component,	from	both	a	lessee	and	lessor	perspective	with	the	exception	of	direct	sales-type
leases	and	production	equipment	classes	embedded	in	supply	agreements.	From	a	lessor	perspective,	the	timing	and	pattern	of	transfer	are	the	same	for
the	non-lease	components	and	associated	lease	component	and,	the	lease	component,	if	accounted	for	separately,	would	be	classified	as	an	operating
lease.
76We	have	elected	not	to	present	short-term	leases	on	the	consolidated	balance	sheet	as	these	leases	have	a	lease	term	of	12	months	or	less	at	lease
inception	and	do	not	contain	purchase	options	or	renewal	terms	that	we	are	reasonably	certain	to	exercise.	All	other	lease	assets	and	lease	liabilities	are
recognized	based	on	the	present	value	of	lease	payments	over	the	lease	term	at	commencement	date.	Because	most	of	our	leases	do	not	provide	an
implicit	rate	of	return,	we	used	our	incremental	borrowing	rate	based	on	the	information	available	at	lease	commencement	date	in	determining	the
present	value	of	lease	payments.
Our	leases,	where	we	are	the	lessee,	often	include	options	to	extend	the	lease	term	for	up	to	
10
	years.	Some	of	our	leases	also	include	options	to
terminate	the	lease	prior	to	the	end	of	the	agreed	upon	lease	term.	For	purposes	of	calculating	lease	liabilities,	lease	terms	include	options	to	extend	or
terminate	the	lease	when	it	is	reasonably	certain	that	we	will	exercise	such	options.
Lease	expense	for	operating	leases	is	recognized	on	a	straight-line	basis	over	the	lease	term	as	cost	of	revenues	or	operating	expenses	depending
on	the	nature	of	the	leased	asset.	Certain	operating	leases	provide	for	annual	increases	to	lease	payments	based	on	an	index	or	rate.	We	calculate	the
present	value	of	future	lease	payments	based	on	the	index	or	rate	at	the	lease	commencement	date	for	new	leases.	Differences	between	the	calculated
lease	payment	and	actual	payment	are	expensed	as	incurred.	Amortization	of	finance	lease	assets	is	recognized	over	the	lease	term	as	cost	of	revenues
or	operating	expenses	depending	on	the	nature	of	the	leased	asset.	Interest	expense	on	finance	lease	liabilities	is	recognized	over	the	lease	term	within
Interest	expense	in	the	consolidated	statements	of	operations.
The	balances	for	the	operating	and	finance	leases	where	we	are	the	lessee	are	presented	as	follows	(in	millions)	within	our	consolidated	balance
sheets:
December	31,	2023
December	31,	2022
Operating	leases:
	
	
Operating	lease	right-of-use	assets
$
4,180
	
$
2,563
	
	
Accrued	liabilities	and	other
$
672
	
$
485
	
Other	long-term	liabilities
3,671
	
2,164
	
Total	operating	lease	liabilities
$
4,343
	
$
2,649
	
	
Finance	leases:
	
	
Solar	energy	systems,	net
$
23
	
$
25
	
Property,	plant	and	equipment,	net
601
	
1,094
	
Total	finance	lease	assets
$
624
	
$
1,119
	
	
Current	portion	of	long-term	debt	and	finance	leases
$
398
	
$
486
	
Long-term	debt	and	finance	leases,	net	of	current	portion
175
	
568
	
Total	finance	lease	liabilities
$
573
	
$
1,054
	
77The	components	of	lease	expense	are	as	follows	(in	millions)	within	our	consolidated	statements	of	operations:
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
2021
Operating	lease	expense:
	
	
	
Operating	lease	expense	(1)
$
1,153
	
$
798
	
$
627
	
	
Finance	lease	expense:
Amortization	of	leased	assets
$
506
	
$
493
	
$
415
	
Interest	on	lease	liabilities
45
	
72
	
89
	
Total	finance	lease	expense
$
551
	
$
565
	
$
504
	
	
Total	lease	expense
$
1,704
	
$
1,363
	
$
1,131
	
(1)
Includes	short-term	leases	and	variable	lease	costs,	which	are	immaterial.
Other	information	related	to	leases	where	we	are	the	lessee	is	as	follows:
December	31,	2023
December	31,	2022
Weighted-average	remaining	lease	term:
Operating	leases
7.4
	years
6.4
	years
Finance	leases
2.3
	years
3.1
	years
	
Weighted-average	discount	rate:
Operating	leases
5.6
	
%
5.3
	
%
Finance	leases
5.5
	
%
5.7
	
%
Supplemental	cash	flow	information	related	to	leases	where	we	are	the	lessee	is	as	follows	(in	millions):
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
2021
Cash	paid	for	amounts	included	in	the	measurement	of	lease	liabilities:
Operating	cash	outflows	from	operating	leases
$
1,084
	
$
754
	
$
616
	
Operating	cash	outflows	from	finance	leases	(interest	payments)
$
47
	
$
75
	
$
89
	
Leased	assets	obtained	in	exchange	for	finance	lease	liabilities
$
10
	
$
58
	
$
486
	
Leased	assets	obtained	in	exchange	for	operating	lease	liabilities
$
2,170
	
$
1,059
	
$
818
	
78As	of	December	31,	2023,	the	maturities	of	our	operating	and	finance	lease	liabilities	(excluding	short-term	leases)	are	as	follows	(in	millions):
	
Operating
Leases
Finance
Leases
2024
$
892
	
$
418
	
2025
831
	
81
	
2026
706
	
57
	
2027
603
	
38
	
2028
508
	
2
	
Thereafter
1,820
	
4
	
Total	minimum	lease	payments
5,360
	
600
	
Less:	Interest
1,017
	
27
	
Present	value	of	lease	obligations
4,343
	
573
	
Less:	Current	portion
672
	
398
	
Long-term	portion	of	lease	obligations
$
3,671
	
$
175
	
As	of	December	31,	2023,	we	have	excluded	from	the	table	above	additional	operating	leases	that	have	not	yet	commenced	with	aggregate	rent
payments	of	$
1.53
	billion.	These	operating	leases	will	commence	between	fiscal	year	2024	and	2025	with	lease	terms	of	
2
	years	to	
20
	years.
Operating	Lease	and	Sales-type	Lease	Receivables
We	are	the	lessor	of	certain	vehicle	and	solar	energy	system	arrangements	as	described	in	Note	2,	
Summary	of	Significant	Accounting	Policies
.	As	of
December	31,	2023,	maturities	of	our	operating	lease	and	sales-type	lease	receivables	from	customers	for	each	of	the	next	five	years	and	thereafter	were
as	follows	(in	millions):
Operating
Leases
Sales-type
Leases
2024
$
1,405
	
$
227
	
2025
960
	
214
	
2026
461
	
210
	
2027
227
	
102
	
2028
197
	
25
	
Thereafter
1,492
	
2
	
Gross	lease	receivables
$
4,742
	
$
780
	
The	above	table	does	not	include	vehicle	sales	to	customers	or	leasing	partners	with	a	resale	value	guarantee	as	the	cash	payments	were	received
upfront.	For	our	solar	PPA	arrangements,	customers	are	charged	solely	based	on	actual	power	produced	by	the	installed	solar	energy	system	at	a
predefined	rate	per	kilowatt-hour	of	power	produced.	The	future	payments	from	such	arrangements	are	not	included	in	the	above	table	as	they	are	a
function	of	the	power	generated	by	the	related	solar	energy	systems	in	the	future.
79Net	Investment	in	Sales-type	Leases
Net	investment	in	sales-type	leases,	which	is	the	sum	of	the	present	value	of	the	future	contractual	lease	payments,	is	presented	on	the
consolidated	balance	sheets	as	a	component	of	Prepaid	expenses	and	other	current	assets	for	the	current	portion	and	as	Other	non-current	assets	for	the
long-term	portion.	Lease	receivables	relating	to	sales-type	leases	are	presented	on	the	consolidated	balance	sheets	as	follows	(in	millions):
December	31,	2023
December	31,	2022
Gross	lease	receivables
$
780
	
$
837
	
Unearned	interest	income
(
78
)
(
95
)
Allowance	for	expected	credit	losses
(
6
)
(
4
)
Net	investment	in	sales-type	leases
$
696
	
$
738
	
	
Reported	as:
Prepaid	expenses	and	other	current	assets
$
189
	
$
164
	
Other	non-current	assets
507
	
574
	
Net	investment	in	sales-type	leases
$
696
	
$
738
	
Lease	Pass-Through	Financing	Obligation
As	of	December	31,	2023,	we	have	
five
	transactions	referred	to	as	“lease	pass-through	fund	arrangements.”	Under	these	arrangements,	our	wholly
owned	subsidiaries	finance	the	cost	of	solar	energy	systems	with	investors	through	arrangements	contractually	structured	as	master	leases	for	an	initial
term	ranging	between	
10
	and	
25
	years.	These	solar	energy	systems	are	subject	to	lease	or	PPAs	with	customers	with	an	initial	term	not	exceeding	
25
years.
Under	a	lease	pass-through	fund	arrangement,	the	investor	makes	a	large	upfront	payment	to	the	lessor,	which	is	one	of	our	subsidiaries,	and	in
some	cases,	subsequent	periodic	payments.	
As	of	December	31,	2023,	the	future	minimum	master	lease	payments	to	be	received	from	investors,	for
each	of	the	next	five	years	and	thereafter,	were	as	follows	(in	millions):
2024
$
18
	
2025
27
	
2026
28
	
2027
29
	
2028
29
	
Thereafter
337
	
Total
$
468
	
Note	13	–	
Equity	Incentive	Plans
In	June	2019,	we	adopted	the	2019	Equity	Incentive	Plan	(the	“2019	Plan”).	The	2019	Plan	provides	for	the	grant	of	stock	options,	restricted	stock,
RSUs,	stock	appreciation	rights,	performance	units	and	performance	shares	to	our	employees,	directors	and	consultants.	Stock	options	granted	under	the
2019	Plan	may	be	either	incentive	stock	options	or	nonstatutory	stock	options.	Incentive	stock	options	may	only	be	granted	to	our	employees.
Nonstatutory	stock	options	may	be	granted	to	our	employees,	directors	and	consultants.	Generally,	our	stock	options	and	RSUs	vest	over	
four	years
	and
our	stock	options	are	exercisable	over	a	maximum	period	of	
10
	years	from	their	grant	dates.	Vesting	typically	terminates	when	the	employment	or
consulting	relationship	ends.
As	of	December	31,	2023,	
131.1
	million	shares	were	reserved	and	available	for	issuance	under	the	2019	Plan.
80The	following	table	summarizes	our	stock	option	and	RSU	activity	for	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023:
Stock	Options
RSUs
Number	of
Options
(in	thousands)
Weighted-
Average
Exercise
Price
Weighted-
Average
Remaining
Contractual
Life	(years)
Aggregate
Intrinsic
Value
(in	billions)
Number
of	RSUs
(in	thousands)
Weighted-
Average
Grant
Date	Fair
Value
Beginning	of	period
343,564
$
30.65
	
21,333
$
162.32
	
Granted
9,521
$
226.50
	
11,743
$
228.33
	
Exercised	or	released
(
7,626
)
$
43.07
	
(
11,085
)
$
116.47
	
Cancelled
(
1,438
)
$
194.23
	
(
2,903
)
$
192.22
	
End	of	period
344,021
$
35.11
	
4.31
$
73.57
	
19,088
$
225.01
	
Vested	and	expected	to	vest,	December	31,	2023
340,884
$
33.38
	
4.27
$
73.45
	
18,446
$
225.76
	
Exercisable	and	vested,	December	31,	2023
329,124
$
27.07
	
4.11
$
72.90
	
The	weighted-average	grant	date	fair	value	of	RSUs	granted	in	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023,	2022	and	2021	was	$
228.33
,	$
239.85
	and
$
261.33
,	respectively.	The	aggregate	release	date	fair	value	of	RSUs	in	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023,	2022	and	2021	was	$
2.50
	billion,	$
4.32
billion	and	$
5.70
	billion,	respectively.
The	aggregate	intrinsic	value	of	options	exercised	in	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023,	2022,	and	2021	was	$
1.33
	billion,	$
1.90
	billion	and
$
26.88
	billion,	respectively.	During	the	year	ended	December	31,	2021,	our	CEO	exercised	all	of	the	remaining	vested	options	from	the	2012	CEO
Performance	Award,	which	amounted	to	an	intrinsic	value	of	$
23.45
	billion.
ESPP
Our	employees	are	eligible	to	purchase	our	common	stock	through	payroll	deductions	of	up	to	
15
%	of	their	eligible	compensation,	subject	to	any
plan	limitations.	The	purchase	price	would	be	
85
%	of	the	lower	of	the	fair	market	value	on	the	first	and	last	trading	days	of	each	
six-month
	offering
period.	During	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023,	2022	and	2021,	under	the	ESPP	we	issued	
2.1
	million,	
1.4
	million	and	
1.5
	million	shares,	respectively.
As	of	December	31,	2023,	there	were	
97.8
	million	shares	available	for	issuance	under	the	ESPP.
Fair	Value	Assumptions
We	use	the	fair	value	method	in	recognizing	stock-based	compensation	expense.	Under	the	fair	value	method,	we	estimate	the	fair	value	of	each
stock	option	award	with	service	or	service	and	performance	conditions	and	the	ESPP	on	the	grant	date	generally	using	the	Black-Scholes	option	pricing
model.	
The	weighted-average	assumptions	used	in	the	Black-Scholes	model	for	stock	options	are	as	follows:
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
2021
Risk-free	interest	rate
3.90
	
%
3.11
	
%
0.66
	
%
Expected	term	(in	years)
4.5
4.1
4.3
Expected	volatility
63
	
%
63
	
%
59
	
%
Dividend	yield
0.0
	
%
0.0
	
%
0.0
	
%
Grant	date	fair	value	per	share
$
121.62
	
$
114.51
	
$
128.02
	
The	fair	value	of	RSUs	with	service	or	service	and	performance	conditions	is	measured	on	the	grant	date	based	on	the	closing	fair	market	value	of
our	common	stock.	The	risk-free	interest	rate	is	based	on	the	U.S.	Treasury	yield	for	zero-coupon	U.S.	Treasury	notes	with	maturities	approximating	each
grant’s	expected	life.	We	use	our	historical	data	in	estimating	the	expected	term	of	our	employee	grants.	The	expected	volatility	is	based	on	the	average
of	the	implied	volatility	of	publicly	traded	options	for	our	common	stock	and	the	historical	volatility	of	our	common	stock.
812018	CEO	Performance	Award
In	March	2018,	our	stockholders	approved	the	Board	of	Directors’	grant	of	
304.0
	million	stock	option	awards,	as	adjusted	to	give	effect	to	the	2020
Stock	Split	and	the	2022	Stock	Split,	to	our	CEO	(the	“2018	CEO	Performance	Award”).	The	2018	CEO	Performance	Award	consisted	of	
12
	vesting
tranches	with	a	vesting	schedule	based	entirely	on	the	attainment	of	both	operational	milestones	(performance	conditions)	and	market	conditions,
assuming	continued	employment	either	as	the	CEO	or	as	both	Executive	Chairman	and	Chief	Product	Officer	and	service	through	each	vesting	date.	Each
of	the	
12
	vesting	tranches	of	the	2018	CEO	Performance	Award	vested	upon	certification	by	the	Board	of	Directors	that	both	(i)	the	market	capitalization
milestone	for	such	tranche,	which	began	at	$
100.0
	billion	for	the	first	tranche	and	increases	by	increments	of	$
50.0
	billion	thereafter	(based	on	both	a	six
calendar	month	trailing	average	and	a	30	calendar	day	trailing	average,	counting	only	trading	days),	had	been	achieved,	and	(ii)	any	one	of	the	following
eight
	operational	milestones	focused	on	total	revenue	or	any	one	of	the	
eight
	operational	milestones	focused	on	Adjusted	EBITDA	had	been	achieved	for
the	four	consecutive	fiscal	quarters	on	an	annualized	basis	and	subsequently	reported	by	us	in	our	consolidated	financial	statements	filed	with	our	Forms
10-Q	and/or	10-K.	Adjusted	EBITDA	was	defined	as	net	income	(loss)	attributable	to	common	stockholders	before	interest	expense,	provision	(benefit)	for
income	taxes,	depreciation	and	amortization	and	stock-based	compensation.	Upon	vesting	and	exercise,	including	the	payment	of	the	exercise	price	of
$
23.34
	per	share	as	adjusted	to	give	effect	to	the	2020	Stock	Split	and	the	2022	Stock	Split,	our	CEO	must	hold	shares	that	he	acquires	for	
five	years
post-exercise,	other	than	a	cashless	exercise	where	shares	are	simultaneously	sold	to	pay	for	the	exercise	price	and	any	required	tax	withholding.
The	achievement	status	of	the	operational	milestones	as	of	December	31,	2023	is	provided	below.
Total	Annualized	Revenue
Annualized	Adjusted	EBITDA
Milestone
(in	billions)
Achievement	Status
Milestone
(in	billions)
Achievement	Status
$
20.0
	
Achieved
$
1.5
	
Achieved
$
35.0
	
Achieved
$
3.0
	
Achieved
$
55.0
	
Achieved
$
4.5
	
Achieved
$
75.0
	
Achieved
$
6.0
	
Achieved
$
100.0
	
-
$
8.0
	
Achieved
$
125.0
	
-
$
10.0
	
Achieved
$
150.0
	
-
$
12.0
	
Achieved
$
175.0
	
-
$
14.0
	
Achieved
Stock-based	compensation	under	the	2018	CEO	Performance	Award	represented	a	non-cash	expense	and	was	recorded	as	a	Selling,	general,	and
administrative	operating	expense	in	our	consolidated	statements	of	operations.	In	each	quarter	since	the	grant	of	the	2018	CEO	Performance	Award,	we
had	recognized	expense,	generally	on	a	pro-rated	basis,	for	only	the	number	of	tranches	(up	to	the	maximum	of	
12
	tranches)	that	corresponded	to	the
number	of	operational	milestones	that	had	been	achieved	or	had	been	determined	probable	of	being	achieved	in	the	future,	in	accordance	with	the
following	principles.
On	the	grant	date,	a	Monte	Carlo	simulation	was	used	to	determine	for	each	tranche	(i)	a	fixed	amount	of	expense	for	such	tranche	and	(ii)	the
future	time	when	the	market	capitalization	milestone	for	such	tranche	was	expected	to	be	achieved,	or	its	“expected	market	capitalization	milestone
achievement	time.”	Separately,	based	on	a	subjective	assessment	of	our	future	financial	performance	each	quarter,	we	determined	whether	it	was
probable	that	we	would	achieve	each	operational	milestone	that	had	not	previously	been	achieved	or	deemed	probable	of	achievement	and	if	so,	the
future	time	when	we	expected	to	achieve	that	operational	milestone,	or	its	“expected	operational	milestone	achievement	time.”
As	of	December	31,	2022,	all	remaining	unrecognized	stock-based	compensation	expense	under	the	2018	CEO	Performance	Award	had	been
recognized.	For	the	years	ended	December	31,	2022	and	2021,	we	recorded	stock-based	compensation	expense	of	$
66
	million	and	$
910
	million,
respectively,	related	to	the	2018	CEO	Performance	Award.
82Other	Performance-Based	Grants
From	time	to	time,	the	Compensation	Committee	of	our	Board	of	Directors	grants	certain	employees	performance-based	RSUs	and	stock	options.
As	of	December	31,	2023,	we	had	unrecognized	stock-based	compensation	expense	of	$
655
	million	under	these	grants	to	purchase	or	receive	an
aggregate	
5.3
	million	shares	of	our	common	stock.	For	awards	probable	of	achievement,	we	estimate	the	unrecognized	stock-based	compensation
expense	of	$
110
	million	will	be	recognized	over	a	weighted-average	period	of	
4.0
	years.
For	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023	and	2022,	we	recorded	$
57
	million	and	$
159
	million,	respectively,	of	stock-based	compensation	expense
related	to	these	grants,	net	of	forfeitures.
Summary	Stock-Based	Compensation	Information
The	following	table	summarizes	our	stock-based	compensation	expense	by	line	item	in	the	consolidated	statements	of	operations	(in	millions):
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
2021
Cost	of	revenues
$
741
	
$
594
	
$
421
	
Research	and	development
689
	
536
	
448
	
Selling,	general	and	administrative
382
	
430
	
1,252
	
Total
$
1,812
	
$
1,560
	
$
2,121
	
Our	income	tax	benefits	recognized	from	stock-based	compensation	arrangements	were	
immaterial
	while	we	were	under	full	valuation	allowances
on	our	U.S.	deferred	tax	assets	during	the	years	ended	December	31,	2022	and	2021.	With	the	release	of	the	valuation	allowance	associated	with	our
federal	and	certain	state	deferred	tax	assets	in	2023,	income	tax	benefits	recognized	from	stock-based	compensation	expense	were	$
326
	million	during
the	year	ended	December	31,	2023.	During	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023,	2022	and	2021,	stock-based	compensation	expense	capitalized	to	our
consolidated	balance	sheets	was	$
199
	million,	$
245
	million	and	$
182
	million,	respectively.	As	of	December	31,	2023,	we	had	$
4.82
	billion	of	total
unrecognized	stock-based	compensation	expense	related	to	non-performance	awards,	which	will	be	recognized	over	a	weighted-average	period	of	
2.8
years.
Note	14	–	
Income	Taxes
Our	income	before	(benefit	from)	provision	for	income	taxes	for	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023,	2022	and	2021	was	as	follows	(in	millions):
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
2021
Domestic
$
3,196
	
$
5,524
	
$
(
130
)
Noncontrolling	interest	and	redeemable	noncontrolling	interest
(
23
)
31
	
125
	
Foreign
6,800
	
8,164
	
6,348
	
Income	before	income	taxes
$
9,973
	
$
13,719
	
$
6,343
	
83A	(benefit	from)	provision	for	income	taxes	of	$(
5.00
)	billion,	$
1.13
	billion	and	$
699
	million	has	been	recognized	for	the	years	ended	December	31,
2023,	2022	and	2021,	respectively.	
The	components	of	the	(benefit	from)	provision	for	income	taxes	for	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023,	2022	and
2021	consisted	of	the	following	(in	millions):
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
2021
Current:
Federal
$
48
	
$
—
	
$
—
	
State
57
	
62
	
9
	
Foreign
1,243
	
1,266
	
839
	
Total	current
1,348
	
1,328
	
848
	
Deferred:
Federal
(
5,246
)
26
	
—
	
State
(
653
)
1
	
—
	
Foreign
(
450
)
(
223
)
(
149
)
Total	deferred
(
6,349
)
(
196
)
(
149
)
Total	(Benefit	from)	provision	for	income	taxes
$
(
5,001
)
$
1,132
	
$
699
	
The	reconciliation	of	taxes	at	the	federal	statutory	rate	to	our	(benefit	from)	provision	for	income	taxes	for	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023,
2022	and	2021	was	as	follows	(in	millions):
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
2021
Tax	at	statutory	federal	rate
$
2,094
	
$
2,881
	
$
1,332
	
State	tax,	net	of	federal	benefit
(
372
)
51
	
6
	
Nondeductible	executive	compensation
23
	
14
	
201
	
Excess	tax	benefits	related	to	stock-based	compensation
(
288
)
(
745
)
(
7,123
)
Nontaxable	manufacturing	credit
(
101
)
—
	
—
	
Foreign	income	rate	differential
(
816
)
(
923
)
(
668
)
U.S.	tax	credits
(
593
)
(
276
)
(
328
)
GILTI	inclusion
670
	
1,279
	
1,008
	
Unrecognized	tax	benefits
183
	
252
	
28
	
Change	in	valuation	allowance
(
5,962
)
(
1,532
)
6,165
	
Other
161
	
131
	
78
	
(Benefit	from)	provision	for	income	taxes
$
(
5,001
)
$
1,132
	
$
699
	
We	monitor	the	realizability	of	our	deferred	tax	assets	taking	into	account	all	relevant	factors	at	each	reporting	period.	As	of	December	31,	2023,
based	on	the	relevant	weight	of	positive	and	negative	evidence,	including	the	amount	of	our	taxable	income	in	recent	years	which	is	objective	and
verifiable,	and	consideration	of	our	expected	future	taxable	earnings,	we	concluded	that	it	is	more	likely	than	not	that	our	U.S.	federal	and	certain	state
deferred	tax	assets	are	realizable.	As	such,	we	released	$
6.54
	billion	of	our	valuation	allowance	associated	with	the	U.S.	federal	and	state	deferred	tax
assets,	with	the	exception	of	our	California	deferred	tax	assets.	We	continue	to	maintain	a	full	valuation	allowance	against	our	California	deferred	tax
assets	as	of	December	31,	2023,	because	we	concluded	they	are	not	more	likely	than	not	to	be	realized	as	we	expect	our	California	deferred	tax	assets
generation	in	future	years	to	exceed	our	ability	to	use	these	deferred	tax	assets.
84Deferred	tax	assets	(liabilities)	as	of	December	31,	2023	and	2022	consisted	of	the	following	(in	millions):
December	31,
2023
December	31,
2022
Deferred	tax	assets:
Net	operating	loss	carry-forwards
$
2,826
	
$
4,486
	
Research	and	development	credits
1,358
	
1,184
	
Other	tax	credits	and	attributes
827
	
217
	
Deferred	revenue
1,035
	
751
	
Inventory	and	warranty	reserves
1,258
	
819
	
Stock-based	compensation
230
	
185
	
Operating	lease	right-of-use	liabilities
930
	
554
	
Capitalized	research	and	development	costs
1,344
	
693
	
Deferred	GILTI	tax	assets
760
	
466
	
Accruals	and	others
206
	
178
	
Total	deferred	tax	assets
10,774
	
9,533
	
Valuation	allowance
(
892
)
(
7,349
)
Deferred	tax	assets,	net	of	valuation	allowance
9,882
	
2,184
	
Deferred	tax	liabilities:
Depreciation	and	amortization
(
2,122
)
(
1,178
)
Investment	in	certain	financing	funds
(
133
)
(
238
)
Operating	lease	right-of-use	assets
(
859
)
(
506
)
Other
(
116
)
(
15
)
Total	deferred	tax	liabilities
(
3,230
)
(
1,937
)
Deferred	tax	assets	(liabilities),	net	of	valuation	allowance
$
6,652
	
$
247
	
As	of	December	31,	2023,	we	maintained	valuation	allowances	of	$
892
	million	for	deferred	tax	assets	that	are	not	more	likely	than	not	to	be
realized,	which	primarily	included	deferred	tax	assets	in	the	state	of	California	and	certain	foreign	operating	losses.	The	valuation	allowance	on	our	net
deferred	tax	assets	decreased	by	$
6.46
	billion	and	$
1.73
	billion	during	the	years	ended	December	31,	2023	and	2022,	respectively,	and	increased	by
$
6.14
	billion	during	the	year	ended	December	31,	2021.	The	valuation	allowance	decrease	during	the	year	ended	December	31,	2023	was	primarily	due
to	the	release	of	our	valuation	allowance	with	respect	to	our	U.S.	federal	and	certain	state	deferred	tax	assets.	The	changes	in	valuation	allowances
during	the	years	ended	December	31,	2022	and	2021	were	primarily	due	to	changes	in	our	U.S.	deferred	tax	assets	and	liabilities	in	the	respective	year.
Among	our	deferred	tax	assets	in	foreign	jurisdictions,	we	recorded	a	valuation	allowance	on	certain	foreign	net	operating	losses	that	are	not	more	likely
than	not	to	be	realized.	The	remainder	of	our	foreign	deferred	tax	assets	are	more	likely	than	not	to	be	realized	given	the	expectation	of	future	earnings
in	these	jurisdictions.
As	of	December	31,	2023,	we	had	$
10.31
	billion	of	federal	and	$
10.36
	billion	of	state	net	operating	loss	carry-forwards	available	to	offset	future
taxable	income,	some	of	which,	if	not	utilized,	will	begin	to	expire	in	2024	for	federal	and	state	purposes.	Federal	and	state	laws	can	impose	substantial
restrictions	on	the	utilization	of	net	operating	loss	and	tax	credit	carry-forwards	in	the	event	of	an	“ownership	change,”	as	defined	in	Section	382	of	the
Internal	Revenue	Code.	We	have	determined	that	no	significant	limitation	would	be	placed	on	the	utilization	of	our	net	operating	loss	and	tax	credit	carry-
forwards	due	to	prior	ownership	changes	or	expirations.
As	of	December	31,	2023,	we	had	federal	research	and	development	tax	credits	of	$
1.10
	billion,	federal	renewable	energy	tax	credits	of
$
605
	million,	and	state	research	and	development	tax	credits	of	$
923
	million.	Most	of	our	state	research	and	development	tax	credits	were	in	the	state	of
California.	If	not	utilized,	some	of	the	federal	tax	credits	may	expire	in	various	amounts	beginning	in	
2036
.	However,	California	research	and	development
tax	credits	can	be	carried	forward	indefinitely.
85The	local	government	of	Shanghai	granted	a	beneficial	corporate	income	tax	rate	of	
15
%	to	certain	eligible	enterprises,	compared	to	the	
25
%
statutory	corporate	income	tax	rate	in	China.	Our	Gigafactory	Shanghai	subsidiary	was	granted	this	beneficial	income	tax	rate	of	
15
%	for	2019	through
2023.	Starting	in	2024,	Gigafactory	Shanghai	is	subject	to	
25
%	statutory	corporate	income	tax	rate	in	China.
As	of	December	31,	2023,	we	intend	to	indefinitely	reinvest	our	foreign	earnings	and	cash	unless	such	repatriation	results	in	no	or	minimal	tax	costs.
We	have	recorded	the	taxes	associated	with	the	foreign	earnings	we	intend	to	repatriate	in	the	future.	For	the	earnings	we	intend	to	indefinitely	reinvest,
no
	deferred	tax	liabilities	for	foreign	withholding	or	other	taxes	have	been	recorded.	The	estimated	amount	of	such	unrecognized	withholding	tax	liability
associated	with	the	indefinitely	reinvested	earnings	is	approximately	$
245
	million.
Uncertain	Tax	Positions
The	changes	to	our	gross	unrecognized	tax	benefits	were	as	follows	(in	millions):
December	31,	2020
$
380
	
Increases	in	balances	related	to	prior	year	tax	positions
117
	
Decreases	in	balances	related	to	prior	year	tax	positions
(
90
)
Increases	in	balances	related	to	current	year	tax	positions
124
	
December	31,	2021
531
	
Increases	in	balances	related	to	prior	year	tax	positions
136
	
Decreases	in	balances	related	to	prior	year	tax	positions
(
12
)
Increases	in	balances	related	to	current	year	tax	positions
222
	
Decreases	in	balances	related	to	expiration	of	the	statute	of	limitations
(
7
)
December	31,	2022
870
	
Increases	in	balances	related	to	prior	year	tax	positions
59
	
Decreases	related	to	settlement	with	tax	authorities
(
6
)
Increases	in	balances	related	to	current	year	tax	positions
255
	
Decreases	in	balances	related	to	expiration	of	the	statute	of	limitations
(
4
)
December	31,	2023
$
1,174
	
We	include	interest	and	penalties	related	to	unrecognized	tax	benefits	in	income	tax	expense.	We	recognized	net	interest	and	penalties	related	to
unrecognized	tax	benefits	in	provision	for	income	taxes	line	of	our	consolidated	statements	of	operations	of	$
17
	million,	$
27
	million	and	$
4
	million	for	the
years	ended	December	31,	2023,	2022	and	2021,	respectively.	As	of	December	31,	2023,	and	2022,	we	have	accrued	$
47
	million	and	$
31
	million,
respectively,	related	to	interest	and	penalties	on	our	unrecognized	tax	benefits.	Unrecognized	tax	benefits	of	$
901
	million,	if	recognized,	would	affect	our
effective	tax	rate.
We	file	income	tax	returns	in	the	U.S.	and	various	state	and	foreign	jurisdictions.	We	are	currently	under	examination	by	the	Internal	Revenue
Service	(“IRS”)	for	the	years	2015	to	2018.	Additional	tax	years	within	the	periods	2004	to	2014	and	2019	to	2022	remain	subject	to	examination	for
federal	income	tax	purposes.	All	net	operating	losses	and	tax	credits	generated	to	date	are	subject	to	adjustment	for	U.S.	federal	and	state	income	tax
purposes.	Our	returns	for	2004	and	subsequent	tax	years	remain	subject	to	examination	in	U.S.	state	and	foreign	jurisdictions.
Given	the	uncertainty	in	timing	and	outcome	of	our	tax	examinations,	an	estimate	of	the	range	of	the	reasonably	possible	change	in	gross
unrecognized	tax	benefits	within	twelve	months	cannot	be	made	at	this	time.
Note	15	–	
Commitments	and	Contingencies
Operating	Lease	Arrangement	in	Buffalo,	New	York
We	have	an	operating	lease	arrangement	through	the	Research	Foundation	for	the	SUNY	Foundation	with	respect	to	Gigafactory	New	York.	Under
the	lease	and	a	related	research	and	development	agreement,	we	are	continuing	to	further	develop	the	facility.
86Under	this	agreement,	we	are	obligated	to,	among	other	things,	meet	employment	targets	as	well	as	specified	minimum	numbers	of	personnel	in
the	State	of	New	York	and	in	Buffalo,	New	York	and	spend	or	incur	$
5.00
	billion	in	combined	capital,	operational	expenses,	costs	of	goods	sold	and	other
costs	in	the	State	of	New	York	during	the	
10-year
	period	beginning	April	30,	2018.	On	an	annual	basis	during	the	initial	lease	term,	as	measured	on	each
anniversary	of	such	date,	if	we	fail	to	meet	these	specified	investment	and	job	creation	requirements,	then	we	would	be	obligated	to	pay	a	$
41
	million
“program	payment”	to	the	SUNY	Foundation	for	each	year	that	we	fail	to	meet	these	requirements.	Furthermore,	if	the	arrangement	is	terminated	due	to
a	material	breach	by	us,	then	additional	amounts	may	become	payable	by	us.
In	2021,	an	amendment	was	executed	to	extend	our	overall	agreement	to	spend	or	incur	$
5.00
	billion	in	combined	capital,	operational	expenses,
costs	of	goods	sold	and	other	costs	in	the	State	of	New	York	through	December	31,	2029.	On	February	1,	2022,	we	reported	to	the	State	of	New	York	that
we	had	met	and	exceeded	our	annual	requirements	for	jobs	and	investment	in	Buffalo	and	New	York	State.	As	of	December	31,	2023,	we	have	met	and
expect	to	meet	the	requirements	under	this	arrangement	based	on	our	current	and	anticipated	level	of	operations.	However,	if	our	expectations	as	to	the
costs	and	timelines	of	our	investment	and	operations	at	Buffalo	prove	incorrect,	we	may	incur	additional	expenses	or	be	required	to	make	substantial
payments	to	the	SUNY	Foundation.
Operating	Lease	Arrangement	in	Shanghai,	China
We	have	an	operating	lease	arrangement	for	an	initial	term	of	
50
	years	with	the	local	government	of	Shanghai	for	land	use	rights	where	we	have
been	constructing	Gigafactory	Shanghai.	Under	the	terms	of	the	arrangement,	we	are	required	to	spend	RMB	
14.08
	billion	in	capital	expenditures	by	the
end	of	2023,	which	has	been	achieved	in	2023,	and	to	generate	RMB	
2.23
	billion	of	annual	tax	revenues	starting	at	the	end	of	2023.	As	of	December	31,
2023,	we	have	met	and	expect	to	meet	the	tax	revenue	requirements	based	on	our	current	level	of	spend	and	sales.
Legal	Proceedings
Litigation	Relating	to	2018	CEO	Performance	Award
On	June	4,	2018,	a	purported	Tesla	stockholder	filed	a	putative	class	and	derivative	action	in	the	Delaware	Court	of	Chancery	against	Elon	Musk	and
the	members	of	Tesla’s	board	of	directors	as	then	constituted,	alleging	corporate	waste,	unjust	enrichment	and	that	such	board	members	breached	their
fiduciary	duties	by	approving	the	stock-based	compensation	plan	awarded	to	Elon	Musk	in	2018.	Trial	was	held	November	14-18,	2022.	Post-trial	briefing
and	argument	are	now	complete.
Litigation	Related	to	Directors’	Compensation
On	June	17,	2020,	a	purported	Tesla	stockholder	filed	a	derivative	action	in	the	Delaware	Court	of	Chancery,	purportedly	on	behalf	of	Tesla,	against
certain	of	Tesla’s	current	and	former	directors	regarding	compensation	awards	granted	to	Tesla’s	directors,	other	than	Elon	Musk,	between	2017	and
2020.	The	suit	asserts	claims	for	breach	of	fiduciary	duty	and	unjust	enrichment	and	seeks	declaratory	and	injunctive	relief,	unspecified	damages	and
other	relief.	Defendants	filed	their	answer	on	September	17,	2020.
On	July	14,	2023,	the	parties	filed	a	Stipulation	and	Agreement	of	Compromise	and	Settlement,	which	does	not	involve	an	admission	of	any
wrongdoing	by	any	party.	If	the	settlement	is	approved	by	the	Court,	this	action	will	be	fully	settled	and	dismissed	with	prejudice.	Pursuant	to	the	terms	of
the	agreement,	Tesla	provided	notice	of	the	proposed	settlement	to	stockholders	of	record	as	of	July	14,	2023.	The	Court	held	a	hearing	regarding	the
settlement	on	October	13,	2023,	after	which	it	took	the	settlement	and	plaintiff	counsels’	fee	request	under	advisement.	The	settlement	is	not	expected
to	have	an	adverse	impact	on	our	results	of	operations,	cash	flows	or	financial	position.
Litigation	Relating	to	Potential	Going	Private	Transaction
Between	August	10,	2018	and	September	6,	2018,	
nine
	purported	stockholder	class	actions	were	filed	against	Tesla	and	Elon	Musk	in	connection
with	Mr.	Musk’s	August	7,	2018	Twitter	post	that	he	was	considering	taking	Tesla	private.	On	January	16,	2019,	Plaintiffs	filed	their	consolidated	complaint
in	the	United	States	District	Court	for	the	Northern	District	of	California	and	added	as	defendants	the	members	of	Tesla’s	board	of	directors.	The
consolidated	complaint	asserts	claims	for	violations	of	the	federal	securities	laws	and	seeks	unspecified	damages	and	other	relief.	The	parties	stipulated
to	certification	of	a	class	of	stockholders,	which	the	court	granted	on	November	25,	2020.	Trial	started	on	January	17,	2023,	and	on	February	3,	2023,	a
jury	rendered	a	verdict	in	favor	of	the	defendants	on	all	counts.	After	trial,	plaintiffs	filed	a	motion	for	judgment	as	a	matter	of	law	and	a	motion	for	new
trial,	which	the	Court	denied	and	judgement	was	entered	in	favor	of	defendants	on	July	11,	2023.	On	July	14,	2023,	plaintiffs	filed	a	notice	of	appeal.
87Between	October	17,	2018	and	March	8,	2021,	
seven
	derivative	lawsuits	were	filed	in	the	Delaware	Court	of	Chancery,	purportedly	on	behalf	of
Tesla,	against	Mr.	Musk	and	the	members	of	Tesla’s	board	of	directors,	as	constituted	at	relevant	times,	in	relation	to	statements	made	and	actions
connected	to	a	potential	going	private	transaction,	with	certain	of	the	lawsuits	challenging	additional	Twitter	posts	by	Mr.	Musk,	among	other	things.	
Five
of	those	actions	were	consolidated,	and	all	
seven
	actions	have	been	stayed	pending	resolution	of	the	appeal	in	the	above-referenced	consolidated
purported	stockholder	class	action.	In	addition	to	these	cases,	
two
	derivative	lawsuits	were	filed	on	October	25,	2018	and	February	11,	2019	in	the	U.S.
District	Court	for	the	District	of	Delaware,	purportedly	on	behalf	of	Tesla,	against	Mr.	Musk	and	the	members	of	the	Tesla	board	of	directors	as	then
constituted.	Those	cases	have	also	been	consolidated	and	stayed	pending	resolution	of	the	appeal	in	the	above-referenced	consolidated	purported
stockholder	class	action.
On	October	21,	2022,	a	lawsuit	was	filed	in	the	Delaware	Court	of	Chancery	by	a	purported	shareholder	of	Tesla	alleging,	among	other	things,	that
board	members	breached	their	fiduciary	duties	in	connection	with	their	oversight	of	the	Company’s	2018	settlement	with	the	SEC,	as	amended.	Among
other	things,	the	plaintiff	seeks	reforms	to	the	Company’s	corporate	governance	and	internal	procedures,	unspecified	damages,	and	attorneys’	fees.	The
parties	reached	an	agreement	to	stay	the	case	until	March	5,	2024.
On	November	15,	2021,	JPMorgan	Chase	Bank	(“JP	Morgan”)	filed	a	lawsuit	against	Tesla	in	the	Southern	District	of	New	York	alleging	breach	of	a
stock	warrant	agreement	that	was	entered	into	as	part	of	a	convertible	notes	offering	in	2014.	In	2018,	JP	Morgan	informed	Tesla	that	it	had	adjusted	the
strike	price	based	upon	Mr.	Musk’s	August	7,	2018	Twitter	post	that	he	was	considering	taking	Tesla	private.	Tesla	disputed	JP	Morgan’s	adjustment	as	a
violation	of	the	parties’	agreement.	In	2021,	Tesla	delivered	shares	to	JP	Morgan	per	the	agreement,	which	they	duly	accepted.	JP	Morgan	now	alleges
that	it	is	owed	approximately	$
162
	million	as	the	value	of	additional	shares	that	it	claims	should	have	been	delivered	as	a	result	of	the	adjustment	to	the
strike	price	in	2018.	On	January	24,	2022,	Tesla	filed	multiple	counterclaims	as	part	of	its	answer	to	the	underlying	lawsuit,	asserting	among	other	points
that	JP	Morgan	should	have	terminated	the	stock	warrant	agreement	in	2018	rather	than	make	an	adjustment	to	the	strike	price	that	it	should	have
known	would	lead	to	a	commercially	unreasonable	result.	Tesla	believes	that	the	adjustments	made	by	JP	Morgan	were	neither	proper	nor	commercially
reasonable,	as	required	under	the	stock	warrant	agreements.	JP	Morgan	filed	a	motion	for	judgment	on	the	pleadings,	which	Tesla	opposed,	and	that
motion	is	currently	pending	before	the	Court.
Litigation	and	Investigations	Relating	to	Alleged	Discrimination	and	Harassment
On	October	4,	2021,	in	a	case	captioned	Diaz	v.	Tesla,	a	jury	in	the	Northern	District	of	California	returned	a	verdict	against	Tesla	on	claims	by	a
former	contingent	worker	that	he	was	subjected	to	race	discrimination	while	assigned	to	work	at	Tesla’s	Fremont	Factory	from	2015-2016.	A	retrial	was
held	starting	on	March	27,	2023,	after	which	a	jury	returned	a	verdict	of	$
3,175,000
.	As	a	result,	the	damages	awarded	against	Tesla	were	reduced	from
an	initial	$
136.9
	million	(October	4,	2021)	down	to	$
15
	million	(April	13,	2022),	and	then	further	down	to	$
3.175
	million	(April	3,	2023).	On	November	2,
2023,	the	plaintiff	filed	a	notice	of	appeal,	and	on	November	16,	2023,	Tesla	filed	a	notice	of	cross	appeal.
On	February	9,	2022,	shortly	after	the	first	Diaz	jury	verdict,	the	California	Civil	Rights	Department	(“CRD,”	formerly	“DFEH”)	filed	a	civil	complaint
against	Tesla	in	Alameda	County,	California	Superior	Court,	alleging	systemic	race	discrimination,	hostile	work	environment	and	pay	equity	claims,	among
others.	CRD’s	amended	complaint	seeks	monetary	damages	and	injunctive	relief.	On	September	22,	2022,	Tesla	filed	a	cross	complaint	against	CRD,
alleging	that	it	violated	the	Administrative	Procedures	Act	by	failing	to	follow	statutory	pre-requisites	prior	to	filing	suit	and	that	cross	complaint	was
subject	to	a	sustained	demurrer,	which	Tesla	later	amended	and	refiled.	The	case	is	currently	in	discovery.
Additionally,	on	June	1,	2022	the	Equal	Employment	Opportunity	Commission	(“EEOC”)	issued	a	cause	finding	against	Tesla	that	closely	parallels	the
CRD’s	allegations.	On	September	28,	2023,	the	EEOC	filed	a	civil	complaint	against	Tesla	in	the	United	States	District	Court	for	the	Northern	District	of
California	asserting	claims	for	race	harassment	and	retaliation	and	seeking,	among	other	things,	monetary	and	injunctive	relief.	On	December	18,	2023,
Tesla	filed	a	motion	to	stay	the	case.	Separately,	on	December	26,	2023,	Tesla	filed	a	motion	to	dismiss	the	case.
On	June	16,	2022,	
two
	Tesla	stockholders	filed	separate	derivative	actions	in	the	U.S.	District	Court	for	the	Western	District	of	Texas,	purportedly	on
behalf	of	Tesla,	against	certain	of	Tesla’s	current	and	former	directors.	Both	suits	assert	claims	for	breach	of	fiduciary	duty,	unjust	enrichment,	and
violation	of	the	federal	securities	laws	in	connection	with	alleged	race	and	gender	discrimination	and	sexual	harassment.	Among	other	things,	plaintiffs
seek	declaratory	and	injunctive	relief,	unspecified	damages	payable	to	Tesla,	and	attorneys’	fees.	On	July	22,	2022,	the	Court	consolidated	the	
two
	cases
and	on	September	6,	2022,	plaintiffs	filed	a	consolidated	complaint.	On	November	7,	2022,	the	defendants	filed	a	motion	to	dismiss	the	case	and	on
September	15,	2023,	the	Court	dismissed	the	action	but	granted	plaintiffs	leave	to	file	an	amended	complaint.	On	November	2,	2023,	plaintiff	filed	an
amended	complaint	purportedly	on	behalf	of	Tesla,	against	Elon	Musk.	On	December	19,	2023,	the	defendants	moved	to	dismiss	the	amended	complaint.
88Other	Litigation	Related	to	Our	Products	and	Services
We	are	also	subject	to	various	lawsuits	that	seek	monetary	and	other	injunctive	relief.	These	lawsuits	include	proposed	class	actions	and	other
consumer	claims	that	allege,	among	other	things,	purported	defects	and	misrepresentations	related	to	our	products	and	services.	For	example,	on
September	14,	2022,	a	proposed	class	action	was	filed	against	Tesla,	Inc.	and	related	entities	in	the	U.S.	District	Court	for	the	Northern	District	of
California,	alleging	various	claims	about	the	Company’s	driver	assistance	technology	systems	under	state	and	federal	law.	This	case	was	later
consolidated	with	several	other	proposed	class	actions,	and	a	Consolidated	Amended	Complaint	was	filed	on	October	28,	2022,	which	seeks	damages	and
other	relief	on	behalf	of	all	persons	who	purchased	or	leased	from	Tesla	between	January	1,	2016	to	the	present.	On	October	5,	2022	a	proposed	class
action	complaint	was	filed	in	the	U.S.	District	Court	for	the	Eastern	District	of	New	York	asserting	similar	state	and	federal	law	claims	against	the	same
defendants.	On	September	30,	2023,	the	Court	dismissed	this	action	with	leave	to	amend	the	complaint.	On	November	20,	2023,	the	plaintiff	moved	to
amend	the	complaint,	which	Tesla	opposed.	On	March	22,	2023,	the	plaintiffs	in	the	Northern	District	of	California	consolidated	action	filed	a	motion	for	a
preliminary	injunction	to	order	Tesla	to	(1)	cease	using	the	term	“Full	Self-Driving	Capability”	(FSD	Capability),	(2)	cease	the	sale	and	activation	of	FSD
Capability	and	deactivate	FSD	Capability	on	Tesla	vehicles,	and	(3)	provide	certain	notices	to	consumers	about	proposed	court-findings	about	the
accuracy	of	the	use	of	the	terms	Autopilot	and	FSD	Capability.	Tesla	opposed	the	motion.	On	September	30,	2023,	the	Court	denied	the	request	for	a
preliminary	injunction,	compelled	four	of	five	plaintiffs	to	arbitration,	and	dismissed	the	claims	of	the	fifth	plaintiff	with	leave	to	amend	the	complaint.	On
October	31,	2023,	the	remaining	plaintiff	in	the	Northern	District	of	California	action	filed	an	amended	complaint,	which	Tesla	has	moved	to	dismiss.	On
October	2,	2023,	a	similar	proposed	class	action	was	filed	in	San	Diego	County	Superior	Court	in	California.	Tesla	subsequently	removed	the	San	Diego
County	case	to	federal	court	and	on	January	8,	2024,	the	federal	court	granted	Tesla’s	motion	to	transfer	the	case	to	the	U.S.	District	Court	for	the
Northern	District	of	California.
On	February	27,	2023,	a	proposed	class	action	was	filed	in	the	U.S.	District	Court	for	the	Northern	District	of	California	against	Tesla,	Inc.,	Elon	Musk
and	certain	current	and	former	Company	executives.	The	complaint	alleges	that	the	defendants	made	material	misrepresentations	and	omissions	about
the	Company’s	Autopilot	and	FSD	Capability	technologies	and	seeks	money	damages	and	other	relief	on	behalf	of	persons	who	purchased	Tesla	stock
between	February	19,	2019	and	February	17,	2023.	An	amended	complaint	was	filed	on	September	5,	2023,	naming	only	Tesla,	Inc.	and	Elon	Musk	as
defendants.	On	November	6,	2023,	Tesla	moved	to	dismiss	the	amended	complaint.
On	March	14,	2023,	a	proposed	class	action	was	filed	against	Tesla,	Inc.	in	the	U.S.	District	Court	for	the	Northern	District	of	California.	Several
similar	complaints	have	also	been	filed	in	the	same	court	and	these	cases	have	now	all	been	consolidated.	These	complaints	allege	that	Tesla	violates
federal	antitrust	and	warranty	laws	through	its	repair,	service,	and	maintenance	practices	and	seeks,	among	other	relief,	damages	for	persons	who	paid
Tesla	for	repairs	services	or	Tesla	compatible	replacement	parts	from	March	2019	to	March	2023.	On	July	17,	2023,	these	plaintiffs	filed	a	consolidated
amended	complaint.	On	September	27,	2023,	the	court	granted	Tesla’s	motion	to	compel	arbitration	as	to	three	of	the	plaintiffs,	and	on	November	17,
2023,	the	court	granted	Tesla’s	motion	to	dismiss	without	prejudice.	The	plaintiffs	filed	a	Consolidated	Second	Amended	Complaint	on	December	12,
2023,	which	Tesla	has	moved	to	dismiss.	Plaintiffs	have	also	appealed	the	court’s	arbitration	order.	Trial	is	currently	set	for	July	7,	2025.
The	Company	intends	to	vigorously	defend	itself	in	these	matters;	however,	we	cannot	predict	the	outcome	or	impact.	We	are	unable	to	reasonably
estimate	the	possible	loss	or	range	of	loss,	if	any,	associated	with	these	claims,	unless	noted.
Certain	Investigations	and	Other	Matters
We	regularly	receive	requests	for	information,	including	subpoenas,	from	regulators	and	governmental	authorities	such	as	the	National	Highway
Traffic	Safety	Administration,	the	National	Transportation	Safety	Board,	the	Securities	and	Exchange	Commission	(“SEC”),	the	Department	of	Justice
(“DOJ”),	and	various	local,	state,	federal,	and	international	agencies.	The	ongoing	requests	for	information	include	topics	such	as	operations,	technology
(e.g.,	vehicle	functionality,	Autopilot	and	FSD	Capability),	compliance,	finance,	data	privacy,	and	other	matters	related	to	Tesla’s	business,	its	personnel,
and	related	parties.	We	routinely	cooperate	with	such	formal	and	informal	requests	for	information,	investigations,	and	other	inquiries.	To	our	knowledge
no	government	agency	in	any	ongoing	investigation	has	concluded	that	any	wrongdoing	occurred.	We	cannot	predict	the	outcome	or	impact	of	any
ongoing	matters.	Should	the	government	decide	to	pursue	an	enforcement	action,	there	exists	the	possibility	of	a	material	adverse	impact	on	our
business,	results	of	operation,	prospects,	cash	flows,	financial	position	or	brand.
89We	are	also	subject	to	various	other	legal	proceedings,	risks	and	claims	that	arise	from	the	normal	course	of	business	activities.	For	example,	during
the	second	quarter	of	2023,	a	foreign	news	outlet	reported	that	it	obtained	certain	misappropriated	data	including,	purportedly	non-public	Tesla	business
and	personal	information.	Tesla	has	made	notifications	to	potentially	affected	individuals	(current	and	former	employees)	and	regulatory	authorities	and
we	are	working	with	certain	law	enforcement	and	other	authorities.	On	August	5,	2023,	a	putative	class	action	was	filed	in	the	United	States	District	Court
for	the	Northern	District	of	California,	purportedly	on	behalf	of	all	U.S.	individuals	impacted	by	the	data	incident,	followed	by	several	additional	lawsuits,
that	each	assert	claims	under	various	state	laws	and	seeks	monetary	damages	and	other	relief.	If	an	unfavorable	ruling	or	development	were	to	occur	in
these	or	other	possible	legal	proceedings,	risks	and	claims,	there	exists	the	possibility	of	a	material	adverse	impact	on	our	business,	results	of	operations,
prospects,	cash	flows,	financial	position	or	brand.
Letters	of	Credit
As	of	December	31,	2023,	we	had	$
525
	million	of	unused	letters	of	credit	outstanding.
Note	16	–	
Variable	Interest	Entity	Arrangements
We	have	entered	into	various	arrangements	with	investors	to	facilitate	the	funding	and	monetization	of	our	solar	energy	systems	and	vehicles.	In
particular,	our	wholly	owned	subsidiaries	and	fund	investors	have	formed	and	contributed	cash	and	assets	into	various	financing	funds	and	entered	into
related	agreements.	We	have	determined	that	the	funds	are	VIEs	and	we	are	the	primary	beneficiary	of	these	VIEs	by	reference	to	the	power	and	benefits
criterion	under	ASC	810.	We	have	considered	the	provisions	within	the	agreements,	which	grant	us	the	power	to	manage	and	make	decisions	that	affect
the	operation	of	these	VIEs,	including	determining	the	solar	energy	systems	and	the	associated	customer	contracts	to	be	sold	or	contributed	to	these
VIEs,	redeploying	solar	energy	systems	and	managing	customer	receivables.	We	consider	that	the	rights	granted	to	the	fund	investors	under	the
agreements	are	more	protective	in	nature	rather	than	participating.
As	the	primary	beneficiary	of	these	VIEs,	we	consolidate	in	the	financial	statements	the	financial	position,	results	of	operations	and	cash	flows	of
these	VIEs,	and	all	intercompany	balances	and	transactions	between	us	and	these	VIEs	are	eliminated	in	the	consolidated	financial	statements.	Cash
distributions	of	income	and	other	receipts	by	a	fund,	net	of	agreed	upon	expenses,	estimated	expenses,	tax	benefits	and	detriments	of	income	and	loss
and	tax	credits,	are	allocated	to	the	fund	investor	and	our	subsidiary	as	specified	in	the	agreements.
Generally,	our	subsidiary	has	the	option	to	acquire	the	fund	investor’s	interest	in	the	fund	for	an	amount	based	on	the	market	value	of	the	fund	or
the	formula	specified	in	the	agreements.
Upon	the	sale	or	liquidation	of	a	fund,	distributions	would	occur	in	the	order	and	priority	specified	in	the	agreements.
Pursuant	to	management	services,	maintenance	and	warranty	arrangements,	we	have	been	contracted	to	provide	services	to	the	funds,	such	as
operations	and	maintenance	support,	accounting,	lease	servicing	and	performance	reporting.	In	some	instances,	we	have	guaranteed	payments	to	the
fund	investors	as	specified	in	the	agreements.	A	fund’s	creditors	have	no	recourse	to	our	general	credit	or	to	that	of	other	funds.	Certain	assets	of	the
funds	have	been	pledged	as	collateral	for	their	obligations.
90The	aggregate	carrying	values	of	the	VIEs’	assets	and	liabilities,	after	elimination	of	any	intercompany	transactions	and	balances,	in	the
consolidated	balance	sheets	were	as	follows	(in	millions):
December	31,
2023
December	31,
2022
Assets
	
	
Current	assets
	
	
Cash	and	cash	equivalents
$
66
	
$
68
	
Accounts	receivable,	net
13
	
22
	
Prepaid	expenses	and	other	current	assets
361
	
274
	
Total	current	assets
440
	
364
	
Solar	energy	systems,	net
3,278
	
4,060
	
Other	non-current	assets
369
	
404
	
Total	assets
$
4,087
	
$
4,828
	
Liabilities
	
	
Current	liabilities
	
	
Accrued	liabilities	and	other
$
67
	
$
69
	
Deferred	revenue
6
	
10
	
Current	portion	of	debt	and	finance	leases
1,564
	
1,013
	
Total	current	liabilities
1,637
	
1,092
	
Deferred	revenue,	net	of	current	portion
99
	
149
	
Debt	and	finance	leases,	net	of	current	portion
2,041
	
971
	
Other	long-term	liabilities
—
	
3
	
Total	liabilities
$
3,777
	
$
2,215
	
Note	17	–	
Related	Party	Transactions
In	relation	to	our	CEO’s	exercise	of	stock	options	and	sale	of	common	stock	from	the	2012	CEO	Performance	Award,	Tesla	withheld	the	appropriate
amount	of	taxes.	However,	given	the	significant	amounts	involved,	our	CEO	entered	into	an	indemnification	agreement	with	us	in	November	2021	for
additional	taxes	owed,	if	any.
Tesla	periodically	does	business	with	certain	entities	with	which	its	CEO	and	directors	are	affiliated,	such	as	SpaceX	and	X	Corp.,	in	accordance	with
our	Related	Person	Transactions	Policy.	Such	transactions	have	not	had	to	date,	and	are	not	currently	expected	to	have,	a	material	impact	on	our
consolidated	financial	statements.
91Note	18	–	
Segment	Reporting	and	Information	about	Geographic	Areas
We	have	
two
	operating	and	reportable	segments:	(i)	automotive	and	(ii)	energy	generation	and	storage.	The	automotive	segment	includes	the
design,	development,	manufacturing,	sales	and	leasing	of	electric	vehicles	as	well	as	sales	of	automotive	regulatory	credits.	Additionally,	the	automotive
segment	is	also	comprised	of	services	and	other,	which	includes	sales	of	used	vehicles,	non-warranty	after-sales	vehicle	services,	body	shop	and	parts,
paid	Supercharging,	vehicle	insurance	revenue	and	retail	merchandise.	The	energy	generation	and	storage	segment	includes	the	design,	manufacture,
installation,	sales	and	leasing	of	solar	energy	generation	and	energy	storage	products	and	related	services	and	sales	of	solar	energy	systems	incentives.
Our	CODM	does	not	evaluate	operating	segments	using	asset	or	liability	information.	
The	following	table	presents	revenues	and	gross	profit	by	reportable
segment	(in	millions):
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
2021
Automotive	segment
	
	
Revenues
$
90,738
	
$
77,553
	
$
51,034
	
Gross	profit
$
16,519
	
$
20,565
	
$
13,735
	
Energy	generation	and	storage	segment
	
	
Revenues
$
6,035
	
$
3,909
	
$
2,789
	
Gross	profit
$
1,141
	
$
288
	
$
(
129
)
The	following	table	presents	revenues	by	geographic	area	based	on	the	sales	location	of	our	products	(in	millions):
Year	Ended	December	31,
2023
2022
2021
United	States
$
45,235
	
$
40,553
	
$
23,973
	
China
21,745
	
18,145
	
13,844
	
Other	international
29,793
	
22,764
	
16,006
	
Total
$
96,773
	
$
81,462
	
$
53,823
	
The	following	table	presents	long-lived	assets	by	geographic	area	(in	millions):
December	31,
2023
December	31,
2022
United	States
$
26,629
	
$
21,667
	
Germany
4,258
	
3,547
	
China
2,820
	
2,978
	
Other	international
1,247
	
845
	
Total
$
34,954
	
$
29,037
	
The	following	table	presents	inventory	by	reportable	segment	(in	millions):
December	31,
2023
December	31,
2022
Automotive
$
11,139
	
$
10,996
	
Energy	generation	and	storage
2,487
	
1,843
	
Total
$
13,626
	
$
12,839
	
Note	19	–	
Restructuring	and	Other
During	the	years	ended	December	31,	2022	and	2021,	we	
recorded
	$
204
	million	and	$
101
	million,	respectively,	of	impairment	losses	on	digital
assets.	During	the	years	ended	December	31,	2022	and	2021	we	also	realized	gains	of	$
64
	million	and	$
128
	million,	respectively,	in	connection	with
converting	our	holdings	of	digital	assets	into	fiat	currency.	We	also	recorded	other	expenses	of	$
36
	million	during	the	second	quarter	of	the	year	ended
December	31,	2022,	related	to	employee	terminations.
92ITEM	9.	CHANGES	IN	AND	DISAGREEMENTS	WITH	ACCOUNTANTS	ON	ACCOUNTING	AND	FINANCIAL	DISCLOSURE
None.
ITEM	9A.	CONTROLS	AND	PROCEDURES
Evaluation	of	Disclosure	Controls	and	Procedures
Our	management,	with	the	participation	of	our	Chief	Executive	Officer	and	our	Chief	Financial	Officer,	evaluated	the	effectiveness	of	our	disclosure
controls	and	procedures	pursuant	to	Rule	13a-15	under	the	Securities	Exchange	Act	of	1934,	as	amended	(the	“Exchange	Act”).	In	designing	and
evaluating	the	disclosure	controls	and	procedures,	our	management	recognizes	that	any	controls	and	procedures,	no	matter	how	well	designed	and
operated,	can	provide	only	reasonable	assurance	of	achieving	the	desired	control	objectives.	In	addition,	the	design	of	disclosure	controls	and	procedures
must	reflect	the	fact	that	there	are	resource	constraints	and	that	our	management	is	required	to	apply	its	judgment	in	evaluating	the	benefits	of	possible
controls	and	procedures	relative	to	their	costs.
Based	on	this	evaluation,	our	Chief	Executive	Officer	and	our	Chief	Financial	Officer	concluded	that,	as	of	December	31,	2023,	our	disclosure
controls	and	procedures	were	designed	at	a	reasonable	assurance	level	and	were	effective	to	provide	reasonable	assurance	that	the	information	we	are
required	to	disclose	in	reports	that	we	file	or	submit	under	the	Exchange	Act	is	recorded,	processed,	summarized	and	reported	within	the	time	periods
specified	in	the	SEC	rules	and	forms,	and	that	such	information	is	accumulated	and	communicated	to	our	management,	including	our	Chief	Executive
Officer	and	our	Chief	Financial	Officer,	as	appropriate,	to	allow	timely	decisions	regarding	required	disclosures.
Management’s	Report	on	Internal	Control	over	Financial	Reporting
Our	management	is	responsible	for	establishing	and	maintaining	adequate	internal	control	over	financial	reporting.	Internal	control	over	financial
reporting	is	a	process	designed	by,	or	under	the	supervision	of,	our	Chief	Executive	Officer	and	Chief	Financial	Officer	to	provide	reasonable	assurance
regarding	the	reliability	of	financial	reporting	and	the	preparation	of	financial	statements	for	external	purposes	in	accordance	with	generally	accepted
accounting	principles	and	includes	those	policies	and	procedures	that	(1)	pertain	to	the	maintenance	of	records	that	in	reasonable	detail	accurately	and
fairly	reflect	the	transactions	and	dispositions	of	our	assets;	(2)	provide	reasonable	assurance	that	transactions	are	recorded	as	necessary	to	permit
preparation	of	financial	statements	in	accordance	with	generally	accepted	accounting	principles,	and	that	our	receipts	and	expenditures	are	being	made
only	in	accordance	with	authorizations	of	our	management	and	directors	and	(3)	provide	reasonable	assurance	regarding	prevention	or	timely	detection
of	unauthorized	acquisition,	use	or	disposition	of	our	assets	that	could	have	a	material	effect	on	the	financial	statements.
Under	the	supervision	and	with	the	participation	of	our	management,	including	our	Chief	Executive	Officer	and	Chief	Financial	Officer,	we	conducted
an	evaluation	of	the	effectiveness	of	our	internal	control	over	financial	reporting	based	on	criteria	established	in	Internal	Control	–	Integrated	Framework
(2013)	issued	by	the	Committee	of	Sponsoring	Organizations	of	the	Treadway	Commission	(“COSO”).	Our	management	concluded	that	our	internal
control	over	financial	reporting	was	effective	as	of	December	31,	2023.
Our	independent	registered	public	accounting	firm,	PricewaterhouseCoopers	LLP,	has	audited	the	effectiveness	of	our	internal	control	over	financial
reporting	as	of	December	31,	2023,	as	stated	in	their	report	which	is	included	herein.
Limitations	on	the	Effectiveness	of	Controls
Because	of	inherent	limitations,	internal	control	over	financial	reporting	may	not	prevent	or	detect	misstatements	and	projections	of	any	evaluation
of	effectiveness	to	future	periods	are	subject	to	the	risk	that	controls	may	become	inadequate	because	of	changes	in	conditions,	or	that	the	degree	of
compliance	with	the	policies	or	procedures	may	deteriorate.
Changes	in	Internal	Control	over	Financial	Reporting
There	was	no	change	in	our	internal	control	over	financial	reporting	that	occurred	during	the	quarter	ended	December	31,	2023,	which	has
materially	affected,	or	is	reasonably	likely	to	materially	affect,	our	internal	control	over	financial	reporting.
93ITEM	9B.	OTHER	INFORMATION
None	of	the	Company’s	directors	or	officers	
adopted
,	modified	or	
terminated
	a	Rule	10b5-1	trading	arrangement	or	a	non-Rule	10b5-1	trading
arrangement	during	the	Company’s	fiscal	quarter	ended	December	31,	2023,	as	such	terms	are	defined	under	Item	408(a)	of	Regulation	S-K,	except	as
follows:
On	
October	23,	2023
,	
Robyn	Denholm
,	one	of	our	
director
s,	
adopted
	a	Rule	10b5-1	trading	arrangement	for	the	potential	sale	of	up	to	
281,116
shares	of	our	common	stock,	subject	to	certain	conditions.	The	trading	arrangement	covers	stock	options	that	expire	in	August	2024.	The	arrangement's
expiration	date	is	August	16,	2024.
On	
November	13,	2023
,	
Andrew	Baglino
,	
Senior	Vice	President
,	Powertrain	and	Energy	Engineering,	
adopted
	a	Rule	10b5-1	trading	arrangement	for
the	potential	sale	of	up	to	
115,500
	shares	of	our	common	stock,	subject	to	certain	conditions.	The	arrangement's	expiration	date	is	December	31,	2024.
ITEM	9C.	DISCLOSURE	REGARDING	FOREIGN	JURISDICTIONS	THAT	PREVENT	INSPECTIONS
Not	applicable.
94PART	III
ITEM	10.	DIRECTORS,	EXECUTIVE	OFFICERS	AND	CORPORATE	GOVERNANCE
The	information	required	by	this	Item	10	of	Form	10-K	will	be	included	in	our	2024	Proxy	Statement	to	be	filed	with	the	Securities	and	Exchange
Commission	in	connection	with	the	solicitation	of	proxies	for	our	2024	Annual	Meeting	of	Stockholders	and	is	incorporated	herein	by	reference.	The	2024
Proxy	Statement	will	be	filed	with	the	Securities	and	Exchange	Commission	within	120	days	after	the	end	of	the	fiscal	year	to	which	this	report	relates.
ITEM	11.	EXECUTIVE	COMPENSATION
The	information	required	by	this	Item	11	of	Form	10-K	will	be	included	in	our	2024	Proxy	Statement	and	is	incorporated	herein	by	reference.
ITEM	12.	SECURITY	OWNERSHIP	OF	CERTAIN	BENEFICIAL	OWNERS	AND	MANAGEMENT	AND	RELATED	STOCKHOLDER	MATTERS
The	information	required	by	this	Item	12	of	Form	10-K	will	be	included	in	our	2024	Proxy	Statement	and	is	incorporated	herein	by	reference.
ITEM	13.	CERTAIN	RELATIONSHIPS	AND	RELATED	TRANSACTIONS	AND	DIRECTOR	INDEPENDENCE
The	information	required	by	this	Item	13	of	Form	10-K	will	be	included	in	our	2024	Proxy	Statement	and	is	incorporated	herein	by	reference.
ITEM	14.	PRINCIPAL	ACCOUNTANT	FEES	AND	SERVICES
The	information	required	by	this	Item	14	of	Form	10-K	will	be	included	in	our	2024	Proxy	Statement	and	is	incorporated	herein	by	reference.
95PART	IV
ITEM	15.	EXHIBITS	AND	FINANCIAL	STATEMENT	SCHEDULES
1.
Financial	statements	(see	
Index	to	Consolidated	Financial	Statements
	in	Part	II,	Item	8	of	this	report)
2.
All	financial	statement	schedules	have	been	omitted	since	the	required	information	was	not	applicable	or	was	not	present	in	amounts	sufficient	to
require	submission	of	the	schedules,	or	because	the	information	required	is	included	in	the	consolidated	financial	statements	or	the	accompanying
notes
3.
The	exhibits	listed	in	the	following	
Index	to	Exhibits
	are	filed	or	incorporated	by	reference	as	part	of	this	report
INDEX	TO	EXHIBITS
Exhibit
Number
Incorporated	by	Reference
Filed
Herewith
Exhibit	Description
Form
File	No.
Exhibit
Filing	Date
3.1
Amended	and	Restated	Certificate	of
Incorporation	of	the	Registrant.
10-K
001-34756
3.1
March	1,	2017
3.2
Certificate	of	Amendment	to	the	Amended	and
Restated	Certificate	of	Incorporation	of	the
Registrant.
10-K
001-34756
3.2
March	1,	2017
3.3
Amended	and	Restated	Bylaws	of	the	Registrant.
8-K
001-34756
3.1
April	5,	2023
4.1
Specimen	common	stock	certificate	of	the
Registrant.
10-K
001-34756
4.1
March	1,	2017
4.2
Fifth	Amended	and	Restated	Investors’	Rights
Agreement,	dated	as	of	August	31,	2009,	between
Registrant	and	certain	holders	of	the	Registrant’s
capital	stock	named	therein.
S-1
333-164593
4.2
January	29,	2010
4.3
Amendment	to	Fifth	Amended	and	Restated
Investors’	Rights	Agreement,	dated	as	of	May	20,
2010,	between	Registrant	and	certain	holders	of
the	Registrant’s	capital	stock	named	therein.
S-1/A
333-164593
4.2A
May	27,	2010
4.4
Amendment	to	Fifth	Amended	and	Restated
Investors’	Rights	Agreement	between	Registrant,
Toyota	Motor	Corporation	and	certain	holders	of
the	Registrant’s	capital	stock	named	therein.
S-1/A
333-164593
4.2B
May	27,	2010
4.5
Amendment	to	Fifth	Amended	and	Restated
Investor’s	Rights	Agreement,	dated	as	of	June	14,
2010,	between	Registrant	and	certain	holders	of
the	Registrant’s	capital	stock	named	therein.
S-1/A
333-164593
4.2C
June	15,	2010
4.6
Amendment	to	Fifth	Amended	and	Restated
Investor’s	Rights	Agreement,	dated	as	of
November	2,	2010,	between	Registrant	and
certain	holders	of	the	Registrant’s	capital	stock
named	therein.
8-K
001-34756
4.1
November	4,	2010
96Exhibit
Number
Incorporated	by	Reference
Filed
Herewith
Exhibit	Description
Form
File	No.
Exhibit
Filing	Date
4.7
Waiver	to	Fifth	Amended	and	Restated	Investor’s
Rights	Agreement,	dated	as	of	May	22,	2011,
between	Registrant	and	certain	holders	of	the
Registrant’s	capital	stock	named	therein.
S-1/A
333-174466
4.2E
June	2,	2011
4.8
Amendment	to	Fifth	Amended	and	Restated
Investor’s	Rights	Agreement,	dated	as	of	May	30,
2011,	between	Registrant	and	certain	holders	of
the	Registrant’s	capital	stock	named	therein.
8-K
001-34756
4.1
June	1,	2011
4.9
Sixth	Amendment	to	Fifth	Amended	and	Restated
Investors’	Rights	Agreement,	dated	as	of	May	15,
2013	among	the	Registrant,	the	Elon	Musk
Revocable	Trust	dated	July	22,	2003	and	certain
other	holders	of	the	capital	stock	of	the	Registrant
named	therein.
8-K
001-34756
4.1
May	20,	2013
4.10
Waiver	to	Fifth	Amended	and	Restated	Investor’s
Rights	Agreement,	dated	as	of	May	14,	2013,
between	the	Registrant	and	certain	holders	of	the
capital	stock	of	the	Registrant	named	therein.
8-K
001-34756
4.2
May	20,	2013
4.11
Waiver	to	Fifth	Amended	and	Restated	Investor’s
Rights	Agreement,	dated	as	of	August	13,	2015,
between	the	Registrant	and	certain	holders	of	the
capital	stock	of	the	Registrant	named	therein.
8-K
001-34756
4.1
August	19,	2015
4.12
Waiver	to	Fifth	Amended	and	Restated	Investors’
Rights	Agreement,	dated	as	of	May	18,	2016,
between	the	Registrant	and	certain	holders	of	the
capital	stock	of	the	Registrant	named	therein.
8-K
001-34756
4.1
May	24,	2016
4.13
Waiver	to	Fifth	Amended	and	Restated	Investors’
Rights	Agreement,	dated	as	of	March	15,	2017,
between	the	Registrant	and	certain	holders	of	the
capital	stock	of	the	Registrant	named	therein.
8-K
001-34756
4.1
March	17,	2017
4.14
Waiver	to	Fifth	Amended	and	Restated	Investors’
Rights	Agreement,	dated	as	of	May	1,	2019,
between	the	Registrant	and	certain	holders	of	the
capital	stock	of	the	Registrant	named	therein.
8-K
001-34756
4.1
May	3,	2019
4.15
Indenture,	dated	as	of	May	22,	2013,	by	and
between	the	Registrant	and	U.S.	Bank	National
Association.
8-K
001-34756
4.1
May	22,	2013
97Exhibit
Number
Incorporated	by	Reference
Filed
Herewith
Exhibit	Description
Form
File	No.
Exhibit
Filing	Date
4.16
Fifth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of	May	7,
2019,	by	and	between	Registrant	and	U.S.	Bank
National	Association,	related	to	2.00%	Convertible
Senior	Notes	due	May	15,	2024.
8-K
001-34756
4.2
May	8,	2019
4.17
Form	of	2.00%	Convertible	Senior	Notes	due	May
15,	2024	(included	in	Exhibit	4.
1
6
).
8-K
001-34756
4.2
May	8,	2019
4.18
Indenture,	dated	as	of	October	15,	2014,	between
SolarCity	and	U.S.	Bank	National	Association,	as
trustee.
S-3ASR(1)
333-199321
4.1
October	15,	2014
4.19
Tenth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of	March
9,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.00%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/6-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.3
March	9,	2015
4.20
Eleventh	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
March	9,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.75%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/7-15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.4
March	9,	2015
4.21
Fifteenth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
March	19,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and
the	Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar
Bonds,	Series	2015/C4-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
March	19,	2015
4.22
Sixteenth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
March	19,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and
the	Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar
Bonds,	Series	2015/C5-15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
March	19,	2015
4.23
Twentieth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
March	26,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and
the	Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar
Bonds,	Series	2015/C9-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
March	26,	2015
4.24
Twenty-First	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
March	26,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and
the	Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar
Bonds,	Series	2015/C10-15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
March	26,	2015
4.25
Twenty-Sixth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
April	2,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C14-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
April	2,	2015
4.26
Thirtieth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
April	9,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C19-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
April	9,	2015
98Exhibit
Number
Incorporated	by	Reference
Filed
Herewith
Exhibit	Description
Form
File	No.
Exhibit
Filing	Date
4.27
Thirty-First	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
April	9,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C20-15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
April	9,	2015
4.28
Thirty-Fifth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
April	14,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C24-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
April	14,	2015
4.29
Thirty-Sixth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
April	14,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C25-15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
April	14,	2015
4.30
Thirty-Eighth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
April	21,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C27-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.3
April	21,	2015
4.31
Thirty-Ninth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
April	21,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C28-15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.4
April	21,	2015
4.32
Forty-Third	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
April	27,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C32-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
April	27,	2015
4.33
Forty-Fourth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
April	27,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C33-15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
April	27,	2015
4.34
Forty-Eighth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
May	1,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.00%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/12-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
May	1,	2015
4.35
Forty-Ninth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
May	1,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.75%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/13-15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
May	1,	2015
4.36
Fifty-Second	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
May	11,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C36-10
.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.4
May	11,	2015
99Exhibit
Number
Incorporated	by	Reference
Filed
Herewith
Exhibit	Description
Form
File	No.
Exhibit
Filing	Date
4.37
Fifty-Third	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
May	11,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C37-15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
May	11,	2015
4.38
Fifty-Seventh	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
May	18,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C40-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.4
May	18,	2015
4.39
Fifty-Eighth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
May	18,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C41-15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
May	18,	2015
4.40
Sixty-First	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
May	26,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C44-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.4
May	26,	2015
4.41
Sixty-Second	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
May	26,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C45-15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
May	26,	2015
4.42
Seventieth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
June	16,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C52-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.4
June	16,	2015
4.43
Seventy-First	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
June	16,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C53-15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
June	16,	2015
4.44
Seventy-Fourth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as
of	June	22,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and
the	Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar
Bonds,	Series	2015/C56-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.4
June	23,	2015
4.45
Seventy-Fifth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
June	22,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C57-15
.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
June	23,	2015
4.46
Eightieth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
June	29,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C61-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
June	29,	2015
100Exhibit
Number
Incorporated	by	Reference
Filed
Herewith
Exhibit	Description
Form
File	No.
Exhibit
Filing	Date
4.47
Eighty-First	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
June	29,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C62-15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
June	29,	2015
4.48
Ninetieth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of	July
20,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C71-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
July	21,	2015
4.49
Ninety-First	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
July	20,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/C72-15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
July	21,	2015
4.50
Ninety-Fifth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
July	31,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.00%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/20-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
July	31,	2015
4.51
Ninety-Sixth	Supplemental	Indenture,	dated	as	of
July	31,	2015,	by	and	between	SolarCity	and	the
Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s	5.75%	Solar	Bonds,
Series	2015/21-15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
July	31,	2015
4.52
One	Hundred-and-Fifth	Supplemental	Indenture,
dated	as	of	August	10,	2015,	by	and	between
SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to	SolarCity’s
4.70%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C81-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
August	10,	2015
4.53
One	Hundred-and-Eleventh	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	August	17,	2015,	by	and
between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C87-
15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
August	17,	2015
4.54
One	Hundred-and-Sixteenth	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	August	24,	2015,	by	and
between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C92-
15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
August	24,	2015
4.55
One	Hundred-and-Twenty-First	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	August	31,	2015,	by	and
between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C97-
15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
August	31,	2015
4.56
One	Hundred-and-Twenty-Eighth	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	September	14,	2015,	by
and	between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C101-
10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
September	15,	2015
101Exhibit
Number
Incorporated	by	Reference
Filed
Herewith
Exhibit	Description
Form
File	No.
Exhibit
Filing	Date
4.57
One	Hundred-and-Twenty-Ninth	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	September	14,	2015,	by
and	between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C102-
15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
September	15,	2015
4.58
One	Hundred-and-Thirty-Third	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	September	28,	2015,	by
and	between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C106-
10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
September	29,	2015
4.59
One	Hundred-and-Thirty-Fourth	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	September	28,	2015,	by
and	between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C107-
15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
September	29,	2015
4.60
One	Hundred-and-Thirty-Eighth	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	October	13,	2015,	by	and
between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C111-
10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
October	13,	2015
4.61
One	Hundred-and-Forty-Third	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	October	30,	2015,	by	and
between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	5.00%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/25-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
October	30,	2015
4.62
One	Hundred-and-Forty-Fourth	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	October	30,	2015,	by	and
between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	5.75%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/26-15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
October	30,	2015
4.63
One	Hundred-and-Forty-Eighth	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	November	4,	2015,	by	and
between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C116-
10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
November	4,	2015
4.64
One	Hundred-and-Fifty-Third	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	November	16,	2015,	by
and	between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C121-
10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
November	17,	2015
4.65
One	Hundred-and-Fifty-Fourth	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	November	16,	2015,	by
and	between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C122-
15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
November	17,	2015
102Exhibit
Number
Incorporated	by	Reference
Filed
Herewith
Exhibit	Description
Form
File	No.
Exhibit
Filing	Date
4.66
One	Hundred-and-Fifty-Eighth	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	November	30,	2015,	by
and	between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C126-
10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
November	30,	2015
4.67
One	Hundred-and-Fifty-Ninth	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	November	30,	2015,	by
and	between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C127-
15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
November	30,	2015
4.68
One	Hundred-and-Sixty-Third	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	December	14,	2015,	by	and
between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C131-
10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
December	14,	2015
4.69
One	Hundred-and-Sixty-Fourth	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	December	14,	2015,	by	and
between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C132-
15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
December	14,	2015
4.70
One	Hundred-and-Sixty-Eighth	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	December	28,	2015,	by	and
between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	4.70%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C136-
10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
December	28,	2015
4.71
One	Hundred-and-Sixty-Ninth	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	December	28,	2015,	by	and
between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	5.45%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2015/C137-
15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
December	28,	2015
4.72
One	Hundred-and-Seventy-Third	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	January	29,	2016,	by	and
between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	5.00%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2016/4-10.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.5
January	29,	2016
4.73
One	Hundred-and-Seventy-Fourth	Supplemental
Indenture,	dated	as	of	January	29,	2016,	by	and
between	SolarCity	and	the	Trustee,	related	to
SolarCity’s	5.75%	Solar	Bonds,	Series	2016/5-15.
8-K(1)
001-35758
4.6
January	29,	2016
4.74
Description	of	Registrant’s	Securities
10-K
001-34756
4.119
February	13,	2020
10.1**
Form	of	Indemnification	Agreement	between	the
Registrant	and	its	directors	and	officers.
S-1/A
333-164593
10.1
June	15,	2010
10.2**
2003	Equity	Incentive	Plan.
S-1/A
333-164593
10.2
May	27,	2010
103Exhibit
Number
Incorporated	by	Reference
Filed
Herewith
Exhibit	Description
Form
File	No.
Exhibit
Filing	Date
10.3**
Form	of	Stock	Option	Agreement	under	2003
Equity	Incentive	Plan.
S-1
333-164593
10.3
January	29,	2010
10.4**
Amended	and	Restated	2010	Equity	Incentive
Plan.
10-K
001-34756
10.4
February	23,	2018
10.5**
Form	of	Stock	Option	Agreement	under	2010
Equity	Incentive	Plan.
10-K
001-34756
10.6
March	1,	2017
10.6**
Form	of	Restricted	Stock	Unit	Award	Agreement
under	2010	Equity	Incentive	Plan.
10-K
001-34756
10.7
March	1,	2017
10.7**
Amended	and	Restated	2010	Employee	Stock
Purchase	Plan,	effective	as	of	February	1,	2017.
10-K
001-34756
10.8
March	1,	2017
10.8**
2019	Equity	Incentive	Plan.
S-8
333-232079
4.2
June	12,	2019
10.9**
Form	of	Stock	Option	Agreement	under	2019
Equity	Incentive	Plan.
S-8
333-232079
4.3
June	12,	2019
10.10**
Form	of	Restricted	Stock	Unit	Award	Agreement
under	2019	Equity	Incentive	Plan.
S-8
333-232079
4.4
June	12,	2019
10.11**
Employee	Stock	Purchase	Plan,	effective	as	of
June	12,	2019.
S-8
333-232079
4.5
June	12,	2019
10.12**
2007	SolarCity	Stock	Plan	and	form	of	agreements
used	thereunder.
S-1(1)
333-184317
10.2
October	5,	2012
10.13**
2012	SolarCity	Equity	Incentive	Plan	and	form	of
agreements	used	thereunder.
S-1(1)
333-184317
10.3
October	5,	2012
10.14**
2010	Zep	Solar,	Inc.	Equity	Incentive	Plan	and
form	of	agreements	used	thereunder.
S-8(1)
333-192996
4.5
December	20,	2013
10.15**
Offer	Letter	between	the	Registrant	and	Elon
Musk	dated	October	13,	2008.
S-1
333-164593
10.9
January	29,	2010
10.16**
Performance	Stock	Option	Agreement	between
the	Registrant	and	Elon	Musk	dated	January	21,
2018.
DEF	14A
001-34756
Appendix	A
February	8,	2018
10.17**
Maxwell	Technologies,	Inc.	2005	Omnibus	Equity
Incentive	Plan,	as	amended	through	May	6,	2010
8-K(2)
001-15477
10.1
May	10,	2010
10.18**
Maxwell	Technologies,	Inc.	2013	Omnibus	Equity
Incentive	Plan
DEF	14A(2)
001-15477
Appendix	A
June	2,	2017
10.19
Indemnification	Agreement,	effective	as	of	June
23,	2020,	between	Registrant	and	Elon	R.	Musk.
10-Q
001-34756
10.4
July	28,	2020
104Exhibit
Number
Incorporated	by	Reference
Filed
Herewith
Exhibit	Description
Form
File	No.
Exhibit
Filing	Date
10.20
Indemnification	Agreement,	dated	as	of	February
27,	2014,	by	and	between	the	Registrant	and	J.P.
Morgan	Securities	LLC.
8-K
001-34756
10.1
March	5,	2014
10.21
Form	of	Call	Option	Confirmation	relating	to
1.25%	Convertible	Senior	Notes	Due	March	1,
2021.
8-K
001-34756
10.3
March	5,	2014
10.22
Form	of	Warrant	Confirmation	relating	to	1.25%
Convertible	Senior	Notes	Due	March	1,	2021.
8-K
001-34756
10.5
March	5,	2014
10.23
Form	of	Call	Option	Confirmation	relating	to
2.00%	Convertible	Senior	Notes	due	May	15,
2024
.
8-K
001-34756
10.1
May	3,	2019
10.24
Form	of	Warrant	Confirmation	relating	to	2.00%
Convertible	Senior	Notes	due	May	15,	2024.
8-K
001-34756
10.2
May	3,	2019
10.25†
Supply	Agreement	between	Panasonic
Corporation	and	the	Registrant	dated	October	5,
2011.
10-K
001-34756
10.50
February	27,	2012
10.26†
Amendment	No.	1	to	Supply	Agreement	between
Panasonic	Corporation	and	the	Registrant	dated
October	29,	2013.
10-K
001-34756
10.35A
February	26,	2014
10.27
Agreement	between	Panasonic	Corporation	and
the	Registrant	dated	July	31,	2014.
10-Q
001-34756
10.1
November	7,	2014
10.28†
General	Terms	and	Conditions	between	Panasonic
Corporation	and	the	Registrant	dated	October	1,
2014.
8-K
001-34756
10.2
October	11,	2016
10.29
Letter	Agreement,	dated	as	of	February	24,	2015,
regarding	addition	of	co-party	to	General	Terms
and	Conditions,	Production	Pricing	Agreement	and
Investment	Letter	Agreement	between	Panasonic
Corporation	and	the	Registrant.
10-K
001-34756
10.25A
February	24,	2016
10.30†
Amendment	to	Gigafactory	General	Terms,	dated
March	1,	2016,	by	and	among	the	Registrant,
Panasonic	Corporation	and	Panasonic	Energy
Corporation	of	North	America.
8-K
001-34756
10.1
October	11,	2016
10.31††
Amended	and	Restated	General	Terms	and
Conditions	for	Gigafactory,	entered	into	on	June
10,	2020,	by	and	among	Registrant,	Tesla	Motors
Netherlands	B.V.,	Panasonic	Corporation	and
Panasonic	Corporation	of	North	America
.
10-Q
001-34756
10.2
July	28,	2020
10.32†
Production	Pricing	Agreement	between	Panasonic
Corporation	and	the	Registrant	dated	October	1,
2014.
10-Q
001-34756
10.3
November	7,	2014
105Exhibit
Number
Incorporated	by	Reference
Filed
Herewith
Exhibit	Description
Form
File	No.
Exhibit
Filing	Date
10.33†
Investment	Letter	Agreement	between	Panasonic
Corporation	and	the	Registrant	dated	October	1,
2014.
10-Q
001-34756
10.4
November	7,	2014
10.34
Amendment	to	Gigafactory	Documents,	dated
April	5,	2016,	by	and	among	the	Registrant,
Panasonic	Corporation,	Panasonic	Corporation	of
North	America	and	Panasonic	Energy	Corporation
of	North	America.
10-Q
001-34756
10.2
May	10,	2016
10.35††
2019	Pricing	Agreement	(Japan	Cells)	with	respect
to	2011	Supply	Agreement,	executed	September
20,	2019,	by	and	among	the	Registrant,	Tesla
Motors	Netherlands	B.V.,	Panasonic	Corporation
and	SANYO	Electric	Co.,	Ltd.
10-Q
001-34756
10.6
October	29,	2019
10.36††
2020	Pricing	Agreement	(Gigafactory	2170	Cells),
entered	into	on	June	9,	2020,	by	and	among
Registrant,	Tesla	Motors	Netherlands	B.V.,
Panasonic	Corporation	and	Panasonic	Corporation
of	North	America
.
10-Q
001-34756
10.3
July	28,	2020
10.37††
2021	Pricing	Agreement	(Japan	Cells)	with	respect
to	2011	Supply	Agreement,	executed	December
29,	2020,	by	and	among	the	Registrant,	Tesla
Motors	Netherlands	B.V.,	Panasonic	Corporation	of
North	America	and	SANYO	Electric	Co.,	Ltd.
10-K
001-34756
10.39
February	8,	2021
10.38††
Amended	and	Restated	Factory	Lease,	executed
as	of	March	26,	2019,	by	and	between	the
Registrant	and	Panasonic	Energy	North	America,	a
division	of	Panasonic	Corporation	of	North
America,	as	tenant.
10-Q
001-34756
10.3
July	29,	2019
10.39††
Lease	Amendment,	executed	September	20,
2019,	by	and	among	the	Registrant,	Panasonic
Corporation	of	North	America,	on	behalf	of	its
division	Panasonic	Energy	of	North	America,	with
respect	to	the	Amended	and	Restated	Factory
Lease,	executed	as	of	March	26,	2019.
10-Q
001-34756
10.7
October	29,	2019
10.40††
Second	Lease	Amendment,	entered	into	on	June
9,	2020,	by	and	between	the	Registrant	and
Panasonic	Energy	of	North	America,	a	division	of
Panasonic	Corporation	of	North	America,	with
respect	to	the	Amended	and	Restated	Factory
Lease	dated	January	1,	2017
.
10-Q
001-34756
10.1
July	28,	2020
106Exhibit
Number
Incorporated	by	Reference
Filed
Herewith
Exhibit	Description
Form
File	No.
Exhibit
Filing	Date
10.41
Amendment	and	Restatement	in	respect	of	ABL
Credit	Agreement,	dated	as	of	March	6,	2019,	by
and	among	certain	of	the	Registrant’s	and	Tesla
Motors	Netherlands	B.V.’s	direct	or	indirect
subsidiaries	from	time	to	time	party	thereto,	as
borrowers,	Wells	Fargo	Bank,	National
Association,	as	documentation	agent,	JPMorgan
Chase	Bank,	N.A.,	Goldman	Sachs	Bank	USA,
Morgan	Stanley	Senior	Funding	Inc.	and	Bank	of
America,	N.A.,	as	syndication	agents,	the	lenders
from	time	to	time	party	thereto,	and	Deutsche
Bank	AG	New	York	Branch,	as	administrative
agent	and	collateral	agent.
S-4/A
333-229749
10.68
April	3,	2019
10.42
First	Amendment	to	Amended	and	Restated	ABL
Credit	Agreement,	dated	as	of	December	23,
2020,	in	respect	of	the	Amended	and	Restated
ABL	Credit	Agreement,	dated	as	of	March	6,	2019,
by	and	among	certain	of	the	Registrant’s	and
Tesla	Motors	Netherlands	B.V.’s	direct	or	indirect
subsidiaries	from	time	to	time	party	thereto,	as
borrowers,	Wells	Fargo	Bank,	National
Association,	as	documentation	agent,	JPMorgan
Chase	Bank,	N.A.,	Goldman	Sachs	Bank	USA,
Morgan	Stanley	Senior	Funding	Inc.	and	Bank	of
America,	N.A.,	as	syndication	agents,	the	lenders
from	time	to	time	party	thereto,	and	Deutsche
Bank	AG	New	York	Branch,	as	administrative
agent	and	collateral	agent.
10-K
001-34756
10.44
February	8,	2021
10.43†
Agreement	for	Tax	Abatement	and	Incentives,
dated	as	of	May	7,	2015,	by	and	between	Tesla
Motors,	Inc.	and	the	State	of	Nevada,	acting	by
and	through	the	Nevada	Governor’s	Office	of
Economic	Development.
10-Q
001-34756
10.1
August	7,	2015
10.44
Purchase	Agreement,	dated	as	of	August	11,
2017,	by	and	among	the	Registrant,	SolarCity	and
Goldman	Sachs	&	Co.	LLC	and	Morgan	Stanley	&
Co.	LLC	as	representatives	of	the	several	initial
purchasers	named	therein.
8-K
001-34756
10.1
August	23,	2017
10.45
Amended	and	Restated	Agreement	For	Research
&	Development	Alliance	on	Triex	Module
Technology,	effective	as	of	September	2,	2014,	by
and	between	The	Research	Foundation	For	The
State	University	of	New	York,	on	behalf	of	the
College	of	Nanoscale	Science	and	Engineering	of
the	State	University	of	New	York,	and	Silevo,	Inc.
10-Q(1)
001-35758
10.16
November	6,	2014
107Exhibit
Number
Incorporated	by	Reference
Filed
Herewith
Exhibit	Description
Form
File	No.
Exhibit
Filing	Date
10.46
First	Amendment	to	Amended	and	Restated
Agreement	For	Research	&	Development	Alliance
on	Triex	Module	Technology,	effective	as	of
October	31,	2014,	by	and	between	The	Research
Foundation	For	The	State	University	of	New	York,
on	behalf	of	the	College	of	Nanoscale	Science	and
Engineering	of	the	State	University	of	New	York,
and	Silevo,	Inc.
10-K(1)
001-35758
10.16a
February	24,	2015
10.47
Second	Amendment	to	Amended	and	Restated
Agreement	For	Research	&	Development	Alliance
on	Triex	Module	Technology,	effective	as	of
December	15,	2014,	by	and	between	The
Research	Foundation	For	The	State	University	of
New	York,	on	behalf	of	the	College	of	Nanoscale
Science	and	Engineering	of	the	State	University	of
New	York,	and	Silevo,	Inc.
10-K(1)
001-35758
10.16b
February	24,	2015
10.48
Third	Amendment	to	Amended	and	Restated
Agreement	For	Research	&	Development	Alliance
on	Triex	Module	Technology,	effective	as	of
February	12,	2015,	by	and	between	The	Research
Foundation	For	The	State	University	of	New	York,
on	behalf	of	the	College	of	Nanoscale	Science	and
Engineering	of	the	State	University	of	New	York,
and	Silevo,	Inc.
10-Q(1)
001-35758
10.16c
May	6,	2015
10.49
Fourth	Amendment	to	Amended	and	Restated
Agreement	For	Research	&	Development	Alliance
on	Triex	Module	Technology,	effective	as	of	March
30,	2015,	by	and	between	The	Research
Foundation	For	The	State	University	of	New	York,
on	behalf	of	the	College	of	Nanoscale	Science	and
Engineering	of	the	State	University	of	New	York,
and	Silevo,	Inc.
10-Q(1)
001-35758
10.16d
May	6,	2015
10.50
Fifth	Amendment	to	Amended	and	Restated
Agreement	For	Research	&	Development	Alliance
on	Triex	Module	Technology,	effective	as	of	June
30,	2015,	by	and	between	The	Research
Foundation	For	The	State	University	of	New	York,
on	behalf	of	the	College	of	Nanoscale	Science	and
Engineering	of	the	State	University	of	New	York,
and	Silevo,	LLC.
10-Q(1)
001-35758
10.16e
July	30,	2015
10.51
Sixth	Amendment	to	Amended	and	Restated
Agreement	For	Research	&	Development	Alliance
on	Triex	Module	Technology,	effective	as	of
September	1,	2015,	by	and	between	The
Research	Foundation	For	The	State	University	of
New	York,	on	behalf	of	the	College	of	Nanoscale
Science	and	Engineering	of	the	State	University	of
New	York,	and	Silevo,	LLC.
10-Q(1)
001-35758
10.16f
October	30,	2015
108Exhibit
Number
Incorporated	by	Reference
Filed
Herewith
Exhibit	Description
Form
File	No.
Exhibit
Filing	Date
10.52
Seventh	Amendment	to	Amended	and	Restated
Agreement	For	Research	&	Development	Alliance
on	Triex	Module	Technology,	effective	as	of
October	9,	2015,	by	and	between	The	Research
Foundation	For	The	State	University	of	New	York,
on	behalf	of	the	College	of	Nanoscale	Science	and
Engineering	of	the	State	University	of	New	York,
and	Silevo,	LLC
.
10-Q(1)
001-35758
10.16g
October	30,	2015
10.53
Eighth	Amendment	to	Amended	and	Restated
Agreement	For	Research	&	Development	Alliance
on	Triex	Module	Technology,	effective	as	of
October	26,	2015,	by	and	between	The	Research
Foundation	For	The	State	University	of	New	York,
on	behalf	of	the	College	of	Nanoscale	Science	and
Engineering	of	the	State	University	of	New	York,
and	Silevo,	LLC.
10-Q(1)
001-35758
10.16h
October	30,	2015
10.54
Ninth	Amendment	to	Amended	and	Restated
Agreement	For	Research	&	Development	Alliance
on	Triex	Module	Technology,	effective	as	of
December	9,	2015,	by	and	between	The	Research
Foundation	For	The	State	University	of	New	York,
on	behalf	of	the	College	of	Nanoscale	Science	and
Engineering	of	the	State	University	of	New	York,
and	Silevo,	LLC.
10-K(1)
001-35758
10.16i
February	10,	2016
10.55
Tenth	Amendment	to	Amended	and	Restated
Agreement	For	Research	&	Development	Alliance
on	Triex	Module	Technology,	effective	as	of	March
31,	2017,	by	and	between	The	Research
Foundation	For	The	State	University	of	New	York,
on	behalf	of	the	Colleges	of	Nanoscale	Science
and	Engineering	of	the	State	University	of	New
York,	and	Silevo,	LLC.
10-Q
001-34756
10.8
May	10,	2017
10.56
Eleventh	Amendment	to	Amended	and	Restated
Agreement	for	Research	&	Development	Alliance
on	Triex	Module	Technology,	effective	as	of	July
22,	2020,	among	the	Research	Foundation	for	the
State	University	of	New	York,	Silevo,	LLC	and
Tesla	Energy	Operations,	Inc
.
10-Q
001-34756
10.6
July	28,	2020
10.57
Twelfth	Amendment	to	Amended	and	Restated
Agreement	for	Research	&	Development	Alliance
on	Triex	Module	Technology,	effective	as	of	May
1,	2021,	among	the	Research	Foundation	for	the
State	University	of	New	York,	Silevo,	LLC	and
Tesla	Energy	Operations,	Inc
.
10-Q
001-34756
10.1
October	25,	2021
109Exhibit
Number
Incorporated	by	Reference
Filed
Herewith
Exhibit	Description
Form
File	No.
Exhibit
Filing	Date
10.58††
Grant	Contract	for	State-Owned	Construction	Land
Use	Right,	dated	as	of	October	17,	2018,	by	and
between	Shanghai	Planning	and	Land	Resource
Administration	Bureau,	as	grantor,	and	Tesla
(Shanghai)	Co.,	Ltd.,	as	grantee	(English
translation).
10-Q
001-34756
10.2
July	29,	2019
10.59
Credit	Agreement,	dated	as	of	January	20,	2023,
among	Tesla,	Inc.,	the	Lenders	and	Issuing	Banks
from	time	to	time	party	thereto,	Citibank,	N.A.,	as
Administrative	Agent	and	Deutsche	Bank
Securities,	Inc.,	as	Syndication	Agent
10-K
001-34756
10.59
January	31,	2023
21.1
List	of	Subsidiaries	of	the	Registrant
—
—
—
—
X
23.1
Consent	of	PricewaterhouseCoopers	LLP,
Independent	Registered	Public	Accounting	Firm
—
—
—
—
X
31.1
Rule	13a-14(a)	/	15(d)-14(a)	Certification	of
Principal	Executive	Officer
—
—
—
—
X
31.2
Rule	13a-14(a)	/	15(d)-14(a)	Certification	of
Principal	Financial	Officer
—
—
—
—
X
32.1*
Section	1350	Certifications
—
—
—
—
X
97
Tesla,	Inc.	Clawback	Policy
—
—
—
—
X
101.INS
Inline	XBRL	Instance	Document
—
—
—
—
X
101.SCH
Inline	XBRL	Taxonomy	Extension	Schema
Document
—
—
—
—
X
101.CAL
Inline	XBRL	Taxonomy	Extension	Calculation
Linkbase	Document.
—
—
—
—
X
101.DEF
Inline	XBRL	Taxonomy	Extension	Definition
Linkbase	Document
—
—
—
—
X
101.LAB
Inline	XBRL	Taxonomy	Extension	Label	Linkbase
Document
—
—
—
—
X
101.PRE
Inline	XBRL	Taxonomy	Extension	Presentation
Linkbase	Document
—
—
—
—
X
104
Cover	Page	Interactive	Data	File	(formatted	as
inline	XBRL	with	applicable	taxonomy	extension
information	contained	in	Exhibits	101)
*
Furnished	herewith
**
Indicates	a	management	contract	or	compensatory	plan	or	arrangement
†
Confidential	treatment	has	been	requested	for	portions	of	this	exhibit
††
Portions	of	this	exhibit	have	been	redacted	in	compliance	with	Regulation	S-K	Item	601(b)(10).
110(1)
Indicates	a	filing	of	SolarCity
(2)
Indicates	a	filing	of	Maxwell	Technologies,	Inc.
ITEM	16.	SUMMARY
None.
111SIGNATURES
Pursuant	to	the	requirements	of	Section	13	or	15(d)	the	Securities	Exchange	Act	of	1934,	the	registrant	has	duly	caused	this	report	to	be	signed	on
its	behalf	by	the	undersigned,	thereunto	duly	authorized.
Tesla,	Inc.
	
Date:	January	26,	2024
/s/	Elon	Musk
Elon	Musk
Chief	Executive	Officer
(Principal	Executive	Officer)
Pursuant	to	the	requirements	of	the	Securities	Exchange	Act	of	1934,	this	report	has	been	signed	below	by	the	following	persons	on	behalf	of	the
registrant	and	in	the	capacities	and	on	the	dates	indicated.
Signature
Title
Date
	
	
	
/s/	Elon	Musk
Chief	Executive	Officer	and	Director	(Principal	Executive	Officer)
January	26,	2024
Elon	Musk
	
/s/	Vaibhav	Taneja
Chief	Financial	Officer	(Principal	Financial	Officer	and	Principal
Accounting	Officer	)
January	26,	2024
Vaibhav	Taneja
	
	
	
	
	
/s/	Robyn	Denholm
Director
January	26,	2024
Robyn	Denholm
	
	
	
	
	
/s/	Ira	Ehrenpreis
Director
January	26,	2024
Ira	Ehrenpreis
	
	
	
	
	
/s/	Joseph	Gebbia
Director
January	26,	2024
Joseph	Gebbia
	
	
	
	
	
/s/	James	Murdoch
Director
January	26,	2024
James	Murdoch
/s/	Kimbal	Musk
Director
January	26,	2024
Kimbal	Musk
	
	
	
/s/	JB	Straubel
Director
January	26,	2024
JB	Straubel
	
	
	
	
	
/s/	Kathleen	Wilson-Thompson
Director
January	26,	2024
Kathleen	Wilson-Thompson
	
	
Exhibit	21.1
SUBSIDIARIES	OF	TESLA,	INC.
112Name	of	Subsidiary
Jurisdiction	of
Incorporation	or	Organization
Alabama	Service	LLC
Delaware
All	EV	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
Allegheny	Solar	1,	LLC
Delaware
Allegheny	Solar	Manager	1,	LLC
Delaware
Alset	Transport	GmbH
Germany
Alset	Warehouse	GmbH
Germany
Ancon	Holdings	II,	LLC
Delaware
Ancon	Holdings	III,	LLC
Delaware
Ancon	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
Ancon	Solar	Corporation
Delaware
Ancon	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
Ancon	Solar	II	Lessee	Manager,	LLC
Delaware
Ancon	Solar	II	Lessee,	LLC
Delaware
Ancon	Solar	II	Lessor,	LLC
Delaware
Ancon	Solar	III	Lessee	Manager,	LLC
Delaware
Ancon	Solar	III	Lessee,	LLC
Delaware
Ancon	Solar	III	Lessor,	LLC
Delaware
Ancon	Solar	Managing	Member	I,	LLC
Delaware
Arpad	Solar	Borrower,	LLC
Delaware
Arpad	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
Arpad	Solar	Manager	I,	LLC
Delaware
AU	Solar	1,	LLC
Delaware
AU	Solar	2,	LLC
Delaware
Banyan	SolarCity	Manager	2010,	LLC
Delaware
Banyan	SolarCity	Owner	2010,	LLC
Delaware
Basking	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
Basking	Solar	II,	LLC
Delaware
Basking	Solar	Manager	II,	LLC
Delaware
Beatrix	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
Bernese	Solar	Manager	I,	LLC
Delaware
Blue	Skies	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
Blue	Skies	Solar	II,	LLC
Delaware
BT	Connolly	Storage,	LLC
Texas
Caballero	Solar	Managing	Member	I,	LLC
Delaware
Caballero	Solar	Managing	Member	II,	LLC
Delaware
Caballero	Solar	Managing	Member	III,	LLC
Delaware
Cardinal	Blue	Solar,	LLC
Delaware
Castello	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
Castello	Solar	II,	LLC
Delaware
Castello	Solar	III,	LLC
Delaware
Chaparral	SREC	Borrower,	LLC
Delaware
Chaparral	SREC	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
Chompie	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
Chompie	Solar	II,	LLC
Delaware
Chompie	Solar	Manager	I,	LLC
Delaware
Chompie	Solar	Manager	II,	LLC
DelawareClydesdale	SC	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
Colorado	River	Project,	LLC
Delaware
Community	Solar	Partners,	LLC
Delaware
Connecticut	Auto	Repair	and	Service	LLC
Delaware
Compass	Automation	Incorporated
Illinois
Dom	Solar	General	Partner	I,	LLC
Delaware
Dom	Solar	Lessor	I,	LP
Cayman	Islands
Domino	Solar	Ltd.
Cayman	Islands
Dom	Solar	Limited	Partner	I,	LLC
Delaware
El	Rey	EV,	LLC
Delaware
Falconer	Solar	Manager	I,	LLC
Delaware
Firehorn	Solar	I,	LLC
Cayman	Islands
Firehorn	Solar	Manager	I,	LLC
Delaware
FocalPoint	Solar	Borrower,	LLC
Delaware
FocalPoint	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
FocalPoint	Solar	Manager	I,	LLC
Delaware
Fontane	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
Fotovoltaica	GI	4,	S.	de	R.L.	de	C.V.
Mexico
Fotovoltaica	GI	5,	S.	de	R.L.	de	C.V.
Mexico
FP	System	Owner,	LLC
Delaware
Giga	Insurance	Texas,	Inc.
Texas
Giga	Texas	Energy,	LLC
Delaware
Grohmann	Engineering	Trading	(Shanghai)	Co.	Ltd.
China
Grohmann	USA,	Inc.
Delaware
Guilder	Solar,	LLC
Delaware
Hamilton	Solar,	LLC
Delaware
Harborfields	LLC
Delaware
Hangzhou	Silevo	Electric	Power	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Harpoon	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
Harpoon	Solar	Manager	I,	LLC
Delaware
Haymarket	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
Haymarket	Manager	1,	LLC
Delaware
Haymarket	Solar	1,	LLC
Delaware
Hibar	Systems	Europe	GmbH
Germany
Hive	Battery	Inc.
Delaware
Ikehu	Manager	I,	LLC
Delaware
IL	Buono	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
Iliosson,	S.A.	de	C.V.
Mexico
Industrial	Maintenance	Technologies,	Inc.
California
Kansas	Repair	LLC
Delaware
Klamath	Falls	Solar	1,	LLC
Delaware
Knight	Solar	Managing	Member	I,	LLC
Delaware
Knight	Solar	Managing	Member	II,	LLC
Delaware
Knight	Solar	Managing	Member	III,	LLC
Delaware
Landlord	2008-A,	LLC
Delaware
Lincoln	Auto	Repair	and	Service	LLC
Delaware
Louis	Solar	II,	LLC
Delaware
Louis	Solar	III,	LLC
Delaware
Louis	Solar	Manager	II,	LLC
Delaware
Louis	Solar	Manager	III,	LLC
DelawareLouis	Solar	Master	Tenant	I,	LLC
Delaware
Louis	Solar	MT	Manager	I,	LLC
Delaware
Louis	Solar	Owner	I,	LLC
Delaware
Louis	Solar	Owner	Manager	I,	LLC
Delaware
Master	Tenant	2008-A,	LLC
Delaware
Matterhorn	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
Maxwell	Technologies,	Inc.
Delaware
Megalodon	Solar,	LLC
Delaware
Monte	Rosa	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Manager	V,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Manager	VI,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Manager	X,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Manager	XI,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Manager	XII,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Master	Tenant	IX,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Master	Tenant	V,	LLC
California
Mound	Solar	Master	Tenant	VI,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Master	Tenant	VII,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Master	Tenant	VIII,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	MT	Manager	IX,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	MT	Manager	VII,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	MT	Manager	VIII,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Owner	IX,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Owner	Manager	IX,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Owner	Manager	VII,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Owner	Manager	VIII,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Owner	V,	LLC
California
Mound	Solar	Owner	VI,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Owner	VII,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Owner	VIII,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Partnership	X,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Partnership	XI,	LLC
Delaware
Mound	Solar	Partnership	XII,	LLC
Delaware
MS	SolarCity	2008,	LLC
Delaware
MS	SolarCity	Commercial	2008,	LLC
Delaware
MS	SolarCity	Residential	2008,	LLC
Delaware
New	Mexico	Sales	and	Vehicle	Service	LLC
Delaware
NBA	SolarCity	AFB,	LLC
California
NBA	SolarCity	Commercial	I,	LLC
California
NBA	SolarCity	Solar	Phoenix,	LLC
California
Northern	Nevada	Research	Co.,	LLC
Nevada
Oranje	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
Oranje	Solar	Manager	I,	LLC
Delaware
Palmetto	Auto	Repair	and	Service	LLC
Delaware
Paramount	Energy	Fund	I	Lessee,	LLC
Delaware
Paramount	Energy	Fund	I	Lessor,	LLC
Delaware
PEF	I	MM,	LLC
Delaware
Perbix	Machine	Company,	Inc.
Minnesota
Presidio	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
Presidio	Solar	II,	LLC
DelawarePresidio	Solar	III,	LLC
Delaware
Pukana	La	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
R9	Solar	1,	LLC
Delaware
Roadster	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Beijing)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Roadster	Finland	Oy
Finland
SA	VPP	Holding	Trust
Australia
SA	VPP	Project	Trust
Australia
Sequoia	Pacific	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
Sequoia	Pacific	Manager	I,	LLC
Delaware
Sequoia	Pacific	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
Sequoia	SolarCity	Owner	I,	LLC
Delaware
Sierra	Solar	Power	(Hong	Kong)	Limited
Hong	Kong
SiiLion,	Inc.
Delaware
Silevo,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Aquarium	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Energy	of	America	1,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Energy	of	America	Manager	1,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Explorer,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Gezellig	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	House	I,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	House	II,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	House	III,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	House	IV,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Integrated	Fund	I,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Integrated	Fund	II,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Integrated	Fund	III,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Integrated	Fund	IV-A,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Integrated	Fund	V,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Integrated	Fund	VI,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Integrated	Manager	I,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Integrated	Manager	II,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Integrated	Manager	III,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Integrated	Manager	IV-A,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Integrated	Manager	V,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Integrated	Manager	VI,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Services	Company,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Ulysses	Manager	I,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Ulysses	Manager	II,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Voyager,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Warehouse	Manager	I,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Warehouse	Manager	II,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Warehouse	Manager	III,	LLC
Delaware
Solar	Warehouse	Manager	IV,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Alpine	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Amphitheatre	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Arbor	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Arches	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	AU	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Cruyff	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Electrical,	LLC
DelawareSolarCity	Electrical	New	York	Corporation
Delaware
SolarCity	Finance	Company,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Finance	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Foxborough	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	FTE	Series	1,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	FTE	Series	2,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Fund	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Grand	Canyon	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Holdings	2008,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	International,	Inc.
Delaware
SolarCity	Leviathan	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	LMC	Series	I,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	LMC	Series	II,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	LMC	Series	III,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	LMC	Series	IV,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	LMC	Series	V,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Mid-Atlantic	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Nitro	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Orange	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Series	Holdings	I,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Series	Holdings	II,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Series	Holdings	IV,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Steep	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Ulu	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
SolarCity	Village	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
SolarRock,	LLC
Delaware
SolarStrong,	LLC
Delaware
Sparrowhawk	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
SREC	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
TALT	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
TALT	TBM	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
TBM	Partnership	II,	LLC
Delaware
TEO	Engineering,	Inc.
California
TES	2017-1,	LLC
Delaware
TES	2017-2,	LLC
Delaware
TES	Holdings	2017-1,	LLC
Delaware
Tesla	2014	Warehouse	SPV	LLC
Delaware
Tesla	Auto	Lease	Trust	2021-A
Delaware
Tesla	Auto	Lease	Trust	2021-B
Delaware
Tesla	Auto	Lease	Trust	2022-A
Delaware
Tesla	Auto	Lease	Trust	2023-A
Delaware
Tesla	Auto	Lease	Trust	2023-B
Delaware
Tesla	Electric	Vehicle	Trust	2023-1
Delaware
Tesla	Autobidder	International	B.V.
Netherlands
Tesla	Automation	GmbH
Germany
Tesla	Automobile	Information	Service	(Dalian)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Management	and	Service	(Haikou)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Beijing)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Changchun)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Changsha)	Co.,	Ltd.
ChinaTesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Chengdu)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Chongqing)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Dalian)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Fuzhou)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Guangzhou)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Guiyang)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Haerbin)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Hangzhou)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Hefei)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Hohhot)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Jinan)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Kunming)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Lanzhou)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Nanchang)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Nanjing)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Nanning)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Ningbo)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Qingdao)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Shanghai)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Shenyang)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Shijiazhuang)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Suzhou)	Co.	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Taiyuan)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Tianjin)	Co.	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Urumqi)	Co.	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Wenzhou)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Wuhan)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Wuxi)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Xi'an)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Xiamen)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Xining)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Yinchuan)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobile	Sales	and	Service	(Zhengzhou)	Co.	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Automobiles	Sales	and	Service	Mexico,	S.	de	R.L.	de	C.V.
Mexico
Tesla	(Beijing)	New	Energy	R&D	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Belgium	BV
Belgium
Tesla	Canada	Finance	ULC
Canada
Tesla	Canada	GP	Inc.
Canada
Tesla	Canada	LP
Canada
Tesla	Charging,	LLC
Delaware
Tesla	Chile	SpA
Chile
Tesla	Construction	(Shanghai)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Czech	Republic	s.r.o.
Czech	Republic
Tesla	Energia	Macau	Limitada
Macau
Tesla	Engineering	Germany	GmbH
Germany
Tesla	Energy	d.o.o.
Slovenia
Tesla	Energy	Management	LLC
Delaware
Tesla	Energy	Operations,	Inc.
Delaware
Tesla	Energy	Ventures	Australia	Pty	Ltd
Australia
Tesla	Energy	Ventures	Limited
United	KingdomTesla	Energy	Ventures	Holdings	B.V.
Netherlands
Tesla	Finance	LLC
Delaware
Tesla	Financial	Leasing	(China)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Financial	Services	GmbH
Germany
Tesla	Financial	Services	Holdings	B.V.
Netherlands
Tesla	Financial	Services	Limited
United	Kingdom
Tesla	France	S.à	r.l.
France
Tesla	Germany	GmbH
Germany
Tesla	General	Insurance,	Inc.
Arizona
Tesla	Greece	Single	Member	P.C.
Greece
Tesla	Hrvatska	d.o.o.
Croatia
Tesla	Hungary	Kft.
Hungary
Tesla	India	Motors	and	Energy	Private	Limited
India
Tesla	Insurance	Brokers	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Insurance	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
Tesla	Insurance,	Inc.
Delaware
Tesla	Insurance	Ltd.
Malta
Tesla	Insurance	Company
California
Tesla	Insurance	Services,	Inc.
California
Tesla	Insurance	Services	of	Texas,	Inc.
Texas
Tesla	International	B.V.
Netherlands
Tesla	Investments	LLC
Delaware
Tesla	Italy	S.r.l.
Italy
Tesla	Jordan	Car	Trading	LLC
Jordan
Tesla	Korea	Limited
Republic	of	Korea
Tesla	Lease	Trust
Delaware
Tesla	LLC
Delaware
Tesla	Manufacturing	Brandenburg	SE
Germany
Tesla	Manufacturing	Mexico,	S.	de	R.L.	de	C.V.
Mexico
Tesla	Manufacturing	Mexico	Holding,	S.	de	R.L.	de	C.V.
Mexico
Tesla	Michigan,	Inc.
Michigan
Tesla	Mississippi	LLC
Delaware
Tesla	Motors	Australia,	Pty	Ltd
Australia
Tesla	Motors	Austria	GmbH
Austria
Tesla	Motors	(Beijing)	Co.,	Ltd.
China
Tesla	Motors	Canada	ULC
Canada
Tesla	Motors	Colombia	S.A.S
Colombia
Tesla	Motors	Holding	B.V.
Netherlands
Tesla	Motors	Denmark	ApS
Denmark
Tesla	Motors	FL,	Inc.
Florida
Tesla	Motors	HK	Limited
Hong	Kong
Tesla	Motors	Iceland	ehf.
Iceland
Tesla	Motors	Ireland	Limited
Ireland
Tesla	Motors	Israel	Ltd.
Israel
Tesla	Motors	Japan	GK
Japan
Tesla	Motors	Limited
United	Kingdom
Tesla	Motors	Luxembourg	S.à	r.l.
Luxembourg
Tesla	Motors	MA,	Inc.
Massachusetts
Tesla	Motors	Netherlands	B.V.
Netherlands
Tesla	Motors	New	York	LLC
New	YorkTesla	Motors	NL	LLC
Delaware
Tesla	Motors	NV,	Inc.
Nevada
Tesla	Motors	PA,	Inc.
Pennsylvania
Tesla	Motors	Romania	S.R.L.
Romania
Tesla	Motors	Sales	and	Service	LLC
Turkey
Tesla	Motors	Singapore	Holdings	Pte.	Ltd.
Singapore
Tesla	Motors	Singapore	Private	Limited
Singapore
Tesla	Motors	Stichting
Netherlands
Tesla	Motors	Taiwan	Limited
Taiwan
Tesla	Motors	TN,	Inc.
Tennessee
Tesla	Motors	TX,	Inc.
Texas
Tesla	Motors	UT,	Inc.
Utah
Tesla	Nambe	LLC
Delaware
Tesla	New	Zealand	ULC
New	Zealand
Tesla	Norway	AS
Norway
Tesla	Poland	sp.	z	o.o.
Poland
Tesla	Property	&Casualty,	Inc.
California
Tesla	Portugal,	Sociedade	Unipessoal	LDA
Portugal
Tesla	Puerto	Rico	LLC
Puerto	Rico
Tesla	Qatar	LLC
Qatar
Tesla	Sales,	Inc.
Delaware
Tesla	Sdn.	Bhd.
Malaysia
Tesla	Shanghai	Co.,	Ltd
China
Tesla	(Shanghai)	New	Energy	Co.,	LTD.
China
Tesla	Spain,	S.L.	Unipersonal
Spain
Tesla	Switzerland	GmbH
Switzerland
Tesla	(Thailand)	Ltd.
Thailand
Tesla	TH1	LLC
Delaware
Tesla	TH2	LLC
Delaware
Telsa	Toronto	Automation	ULC
Canada
Tesla	Toronto	International	Holdings	ULC
Canada
Tesla	
Transport	B.V.
Netherlands
The	Big	Green	Solar	I,	LLC
Delaware
The	Big	Green	Solar	Manager	I,	LLC
Delaware
Three	Rivers	Solar	1,	LLC
Delaware
Three	Rivers	Solar	2,	LLC
Delaware
Three	Rivers	Solar	3,	LLC
Delaware
Three	Rivers	Solar	Manager	1,	LLC
Delaware
Three	Rivers	Solar	Manager	2,	LLC
Delaware
Three	Rivers	Solar	Manager	3,	LLC
Delaware
TM	International	C.V.
Netherlands
TM	Sweden	AB
Sweden
USB	SolarCity	Manager	IV,	LLC
Delaware
USB	SolarCity	Master	Tenant	IV,	LLC
California
USB	SolarCity	Owner	IV,	LLC
California
Visigoth	Solar	1,	LLC
Delaware
Visigoth	Solar	Holdings,	LLC
Delaware
Visigoth	Solar	Managing	Member	1,	LLC
Delaware
VPP	Project	1	(SA)	Pty	Ltd.
Australia
Weisshorn	Solar	I,	LLC
Cayman	IslandsWeisshorn	Solar	Manager	I,	LLC
Delaware
Zep	Solar	LLC
California
Exhibit	23.1
CONSENT	OF	INDEPENDENT	REGISTERED	PUBLIC	ACCOUNTING	FIRM
We	hereby	consent	to	the	incorporation	by	reference	in	the	Registration	Statements	on	Form	S-8	(Nos.	333-232079,	333-223169,	333-216376,	333-
209696,	333-198002,	333-187113,	333-183033,	and	333-167874)	of	Tesla,	Inc.	of	our	report	dated	January	26,	2024	relating	to	the	financial	statements
and	the	effectiveness	of	internal	control	over	financial	reporting,	which	appears	in	this	Form	10-K.
/s/	PricewaterhouseCoopers	LLP
San	Jose,	California
January	26,	2024
Exhibit	31.1
CERTIFICATIONS
I,	Elon	Musk,	certify	that:
1.
I	have	reviewed	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K	of	Tesla,	Inc.;
2.
Based	on	my	knowledge,	this	report	does	not	contain	any	untrue	statement	of	a	material	fact	or	omit	to	state	a	material	fact	necessary	to	make	the
statements	made,	in	light	of	the	circumstances	under	which	such	statements	were	made,	not	misleading	with	respect	to	the	period	covered	by	this
report;
3.
Based	on	my	knowledge,	the	financial	statements,	and	other	financial	information	included	in	this	report,	fairly	present	in	all	material	respects	the
financial	condition,	results	of	operations	and	cash	flows	of	the	registrant	as	of,	and	for,	the	periods	presented	in	this	report;
4.
The	registrant’s	other	certifying	officer	and	I	are	responsible	for	establishing	and	maintaining	disclosure	controls	and	procedures	(as	defined	in
Exchange	Act	Rules	13a-15(e)	and	15d-15(e))	and	internal	control	over	financial	reporting	(as	defined	in	Exchange	Act	Rules	13a-15(f)	and	15d-
15(f))	for	the	registrant	and	have:
(a)
Designed	such	disclosure	controls	and	procedures,	or	caused	such	disclosure	controls	and	procedures	to	be	designed	under	our
supervision,	to	ensure	that	material	information	relating	to	the	registrant,	including	its	consolidated	subsidiaries,	is	made	known	to	us
by	others	within	those	entities,	particularly	during	the	period	in	which	this	report	is	being	prepared;
(b)
Designed	such	internal	control	over	financial	reporting,	or	caused	such	internal	control	over	financial	reporting	to	be	designed	under
our	supervision,	to	provide	reasonable	assurance	regarding	the	reliability	of	financial	reporting	and	the	preparation	of	financial
statements	for	external	purposes	in	accordance	with	generally	accepted	accounting	principles;
(c)
Evaluated	the	effectiveness	of	the	registrant’s	disclosure	controls	and	procedures	and	presented	in	this	report	our	conclusions	about
the	effectiveness	of	the	disclosure	controls	and	procedures,	as	of	the	end	of	the	period	covered	by	this	report	based	on	such	evaluation;
and
(d)
Disclosed	in	this	report	any	change	in	the	registrant’s	internal	control	over	financial	reporting	that	occurred	during	the	registrant’s
most	recent	fiscal	quarter	(the	registrant’s	fourth	fiscal	quarter	in	the	case	of	an	annual	report)	that	has	materially	affected,	or	is
reasonably	likely	to	materially	affect,	the	registrant’s	internal	control	over	financial	reporting;	and
5.
The	registrant’s	other	certifying	officer	and	I	have	disclosed,	based	on	our	most	recent	evaluation	of	internal	control	over	financial	reporting,	to	the
registrant’s	auditors	and	the	audit	committee	of	the	registrant’s	Board	of	Directors	(or	persons	performing	the	equivalent	functions):
(a)
All	significant	deficiencies	and	material	weaknesses	in	the	design	or	operation	of	internal	control	over	financial	reporting	which	are
reasonably	likely	to	adversely	affect	the	registrant’s	ability	to	record,	process,	summarize	and	report	financial	information;	and
(b)
Any	fraud,	whether	or	not	material,	that	involves	management	or	other	employees	who	have	a	significant	role	in	the	registrant’sinternal	control	over	financial	reporting.
Date:	January	26,	2024
/s/	Elon	Musk
	
Elon	Musk
	
Chief	Executive	Officer
	
(Principal	Executive	Officer)
Exhibit	31.2
CERTIFICATIONS
I,	Vaibhav	Taneja,	certify	that:
1.
I	have	reviewed	this	Annual	Report	on	Form	10-K	of	Tesla,	Inc.;
2.
Based	on	my	knowledge,	this	report	does	not	contain	any	untrue	statement	of	a	material	fact	or	omit	to	state	a	material	fact	necessary	to	make	the
statements	made,	in	light	of	the	circumstances	under	which	such	statements	were	made,	not	misleading	with	respect	to	the	period	covered	by	this
report;
3.
Based	on	my	knowledge,	the	financial	statements,	and	other	financial	information	included	in	this	report,	fairly	present	in	all	material	respects	the
financial	condition,	results	of	operations	and	cash	flows	of	the	registrant	as	of,	and	for,	the	periods	presented	in	this	report;
4.
The	registrant’s	other	certifying	officer	and	I	are	responsible	for	establishing	and	maintaining	disclosure	controls	and	procedures	(as	defined	in
Exchange	Act	Rules	13a-15(e)	and	15d-15(e))	and	internal	control	over	financial	reporting	(as	defined	in	Exchange	Act	Rules	13a-15(f)	and	15d-
15(f))	for	the	registrant	and	have:
(a)
Designed	such	disclosure	controls	and	procedures,	or	caused	such	disclosure	controls	and	procedures	to	be	designed	under	our
supervision,	to	ensure	that	material	information	relating	to	the	registrant,	including	its	consolidated	subsidiaries,	is	made	known	to	us
by	others	within	those	entities,	particularly	during	the	period	in	which	this	report	is	being	prepared;
(b)
Designed	such	internal	control	over	financial	reporting,	or	caused	such	internal	control	over	financial	reporting	to	be	designed	under
our	supervision,	to	provide	reasonable	assurance	regarding	the	reliability	of	financial	reporting	and	the	preparation	of	financial
statements	for	external	purposes	in	accordance	with	generally	accepted	accounting	principles;
(c)
Evaluated	the	effectiveness	of	the	registrant’s	disclosure	controls	and	procedures	and	presented	in	this	report	our	conclusions	about
the	effectiveness	of	the	disclosure	controls	and	procedures,	as	of	the	end	of	the	period	covered	by	this	report	based	on	such	evaluation;
and
(d)
Disclosed	in	this	report	any	change	in	the	registrant’s	internal	control	over	financial	reporting	that	occurred	during	the	registrant’s
most	recent	fiscal	quarter	(the	registrant’s	fourth	fiscal	quarter	in	the	case	of	an	annual	report)	that	has	materially	affected,	or	is
reasonably	likely	to	materially	affect,	the	registrant’s	internal	control	over	financial	reporting;	and
5.
The	registrant’s	other	certifying	officer	and	I	have	disclosed,	based	on	our	most	recent	evaluation	of	internal	control	over	financial	reporting,	to	the
registrant’s	auditors	and	the	audit	committee	of	the	registrant’s	Board	of	Directors	(or	persons	performing	the	equivalent	functions):
(a)
All	significant	deficiencies	and	material	weaknesses	in	the	design	or	operation	of	internal	control	over	financial	reporting	which	are
reasonably	likely	to	adversely	affect	the	registrant’s	ability	to	record,	process,	summarize	and	report	financial	information;	and
(b)
Any	fraud,	whether	or	not	material,	that	involves	management	or	other	employees	who	have	a	significant	role	in	the	registrant’s
internal	control	over	financial	reporting.
Date:	January	26,	2024
/s/	Vaibhav	Taneja
	
Vaibhav	Taneja
	
Chief	Financial	Officer
	
(Principal	Financial	Officer	and	
Principal	Accounting	Officer)
Exhibit	32.1
SECTION	1350	CERTIFICATIONS
I,	Elon	Musk,	certify,	pursuant	to	18	U.S.C.	Section	1350,	that,	to	my	knowledge,	the	Annual	Report	of	Tesla,	Inc.	on	Form	10-K	for	the	annual	period	ended
December	31,	2023,	(i)	fully	complies	with	the	requirements	of	Section	13(a)	or	15(d)	of	the	Securities	Exchange	Act	of	1934	and	(ii)	that	the	information
contained	in	such	Form	10-K	fairly	presents,	in	all	material	respects,	the	financial	condition	and	results	of	operations	of	Tesla,	Inc.Date:	January	26,	2024
/s/	Elon	Musk
	
Elon	Musk
	
Chief	Executive	Officer
	
(Principal	Executive	Officer)
I,	Vaibhav	Taneja,	certify,	pursuant	to	18	U.S.C.	Section	1350,	that,	to	my	knowledge,	the	Annual	Report	of	Tesla,	Inc.	on	Form	10-K	for	the	annual	period
ended	December	31,	2023,	(i)	fully	complies	with	the	requirements	of	Section	13(a)	or	15(d)	of	the	Securities	Exchange	Act	of	1934	and	(ii)	that	the
information	contained	in	such	Form	10-K	fairly	presents,	in	all	material	respects,	the	financial	condition	and	results	of	operations	of	Tesla,	Inc.
Date:	January	26,	2024
/s/	Vaibhav	Taneja
	
Vaibhav	Taneja
	
Chief	Financial	Officer
	
(Principal	Financial	Officer	and
	Principal	Accounting	Officer)
Exhibit	97
Tesla,	Inc.
CLAWBACK	POLICY
The	Compensation	Committee	(the	“
Committee
”)	of	the	Board	of	Directors	(the	“
Board
”)	of	Tesla,	Inc.	(the	“
Company
”)
believes	that	it	is	appropriate	for	the	Company	to	adopt	this	Clawback	Policy	(this	“
Policy
”)	to	be	applied	to	the	certain
executive	officers	of	the	Company	and	adopts	this	Policy	to	be	effective	as	of	the	Effective	Date.
1.
Definitions
For	purposes	of	this	Policy,	the	following	definitions	shall	apply:
a)
“
Company	Group
”	means	the	Company	and	each	of	its	Subsidiaries,	as	applicable.
b)
“
Covered	Compensation
”	means	any	Incentive-Based	Compensation	Received	by	a	person	who	served	as	an
Executive	Officer	at	any	time	during	the	performance	period	for	such	Incentive-Based	Compensation	and	that	was
Received	(i)	on	or	after	October	2,	2023	and	(ii)	after	the	person	became	an	Executive	Officer.
c)
“
Effective	Date
”	means	November	15,	2023.
d)
“
Erroneously	Awarded	Compensation
”	means	the	amount	of	Covered	Compensation	Received	by	a	person	during
the	fiscal	period	when	the	applicable	Financial	Reporting	Measure	relating	to	such	Covered	Compensation	was
attained	that	exceeds	the	amount	of	Covered	Compensation	that	otherwise	would	have	been	Received	by	such
person	had	such	amount	been	determined	based	on	the	applicable	Restatement,	computed	without	regard	to	any
taxes	paid	(i.e.,	on	a	pre-tax	basis).	For	Covered	Compensation	based	on	stock	price	or	total	shareholder	return,
where	the	amount	of	Erroneously	Awarded	Compensation	is	not	subject	to	mathematical	recalculation	directly
from	the	information	in	a	Restatement,	the	Committee	will	determine	the	amount	of	such	Covered	Compensation
that	constitutes	Erroneously	Awarded	Compensation,	if	any,	based	on	a	reasonable	estimate	of	the	effect	of	the
Restatement	on	the	stock	price	or	total	shareholder	return	upon	which	the	Covered	Compensation	was	granted,
vested	or	paid	and	the	Committee	shall	maintain	documentation	of	such	determination	and	provide	such
documentation	to	Nasdaq.
e)
“
Exchange	Act
”	means	the	U.S.	Securities	Exchange	Act	of	1934,	as	amended.
f)
“
Executive	Officer
”	means	each	“executive	officer”	of	the	Company	(as	defined	in	Rule	10D-1(d)	under	the
Exchange	Act),	which	shall	be	deemed	to	include	any	individuals	identified	by	the	Company	as	executive	officers
pursuant	to	Item	401(b)	of	Regulation	S-K	under	the	Exchange	Act.	Both	current	and	former	Executive	Officers
are	subject	to	the	Policy	in	accordance	with	its	terms.
1g)
“
Financial	Reporting	Measure
”	means	(i)	any	measure	that	is	determined	and	presented	in	accordance	with	the
accounting	principles	used	in	preparing	the	Company’s	financial	statements,	and	any	measures	derived	wholly	or
in	part	from	such	measures	and	may	consist	of	GAAP	or	non-GAAP	financial	measures	(as	defined	under
Regulation	G	of	the	Exchange	Act	and	Item	10	of	Regulation	S-K	under	the	Exchange	Act),	(ii)	stock	price	or	(iii)
total	shareholder	return.	Financial	Reporting	Measures	may	or	may	not	be	filed	with	the	SEC	and	may	be
presented	outside	the	Company’s	financial	statements,	such	as	in	Managements’	Discussion	and	Analysis	of
Financial	Conditions	and	Result	of	Operations	or	in	the	performance	graph	required	under	Item	201(e)	of
Regulation	S-K	under	the	Exchange	Act.
h)
“
Incentive-Based	Compensation
”	means	any	compensation	that	is	granted,	earned	or	vested	based	wholly	or	in
part	upon	the	attainment	of	a	Financial	Reporting	Measure.
i)
“
Lookback	Period
”	means	the	three	completed	fiscal	years	(plus	any	transition	period	of	less	than	nine	months
that	is	within	or	immediately	following	the	three	completed	fiscal	years	and	that	results	from	a	change	in	the
Company’s	fiscal	year)	immediately	preceding	the	date	on	which	the	Company	is	required	to	prepare	a
Restatement	for	a	given	reporting	period,	with	such	date	being	the	earlier	of:	(i)	the	date	the	Board,	a	committee
of	the	Board,	or	the	officer	or	officers	of	the	Company	authorized	to	take	such	action	if	Board	action	is	not
required,	concludes,	or	reasonably	should	have	concluded,	that	the	Company	is	required	to	prepare	a
Restatement,	or	(ii)	the	date	a	court,	regulator	or	other	legally	authorized	body	directs	the	Company	to	prepare	a
Restatement.	Recovery	of	any	Erroneously	Awarded	Compensation	under	the	Policy	is	not	dependent	on	if	or
when	the	Restatement	is	actually	filed.
j)
“
Nasdaq
”	means	the	Nasdaq	Stock	Market.
k)
“
Received
”:	Incentive-Based	Compensation	is	deemed	“Received”	in	the	Company’s	fiscal	period	during	which
the	Financial	Reporting	Measure	specified	in	or	otherwise	relating	to	the	Incentive-Based	Compensation	award	is
attained,	even	if	the	grant,	certification	of	achievement,	vesting	or	payment	of	the	Incentive-Based	Compensation
occurs	after	the	end	of	that	period.
l)
“
Restatement
”	means	an	accounting	restatement	required	due	to	the	material	noncompliance	by	the	Company
with	any	financial	reporting	requirement	under	the	securities	laws,	including	(i)	to	correct	an	error	in	previously
issued	financial	statements	that	is	material	to	the	previously	issued	financial	statements	(commonly	referred	to
as	a	“Big	R”	restatement)	or	(ii)	to	correct	an	error	in	previously	issued	financial	statements	that	is	not	material
to	the	previously	issued	financial	statements	but	that	would	result	in	a	material	misstatement	if	the	error	were
corrected	in	the	current	period	or	left	uncorrected	in	the	current	period	(commonly	referred	to	as	a	“little	r”
restatement).	Changes	to	the	Company’s	financial	statements	that	do	not	represent	error	corrections	under	the
then-current	relevant	accounting	standards	will	not	constitute	Restatements.
2m)
“
SEC
”	means	the	U.S.	Securities	and	Exchange	Commission.
n)
“
Subsidiary
”	means	any	domestic	or	foreign	corporation,	partnership,	association,	joint	stock	company,	joint
venture,	trust	or	unincorporated	organization	“affiliated”	with	the	Company,	that	is,	directly	or	indirectly,	through
one	or	more	intermediaries,	“controlling”,	“controlled	by”	or	“under	common	control	with”,	the	Company.
“Control”	for	this	purpose	means	the	possession,	direct	or	indirect,	of	the	power	to	direct	or	cause	the	direction	of
the	management	and	policies	of	such	person,	whether	through	the	ownership	of	voting	securities,	contract	or
otherwise.
2.
Recoupment	of	Erroneously	Awarded	Compensation
In	the	event	of	a	Restatement,	any	Erroneously	Awarded	Compensation	Received	during	the	Lookback	Period	that	(a)	is
then-outstanding	but	has	not	yet	been	paid	shall	be	automatically	and	immediately	forfeited	or	(b)	has	been	paid	to	any
person	shall	be	subject	to	reasonably	prompt	repayment	to	the	Company	Group	in	accordance	with	Section	3	of	this	Policy.
The	Committee	must	pursue	(and	shall	not	have	the	discretion	to	waive)	the	forfeiture	and/or	repayment	of	such
Erroneously	Awarded	Compensation	in	accordance	with	Section	3	of	this	Policy,	except	as	provided	below.	Recovery	of	any
Erroneously	Awarded	Compensation	under	the	Policy	is	not	dependent	on	fraud	or	misconduct	by	any	person	in	connection
with	the	Restatement.
Notwithstanding	the	foregoing,	the	Committee	(or,	if	the	Committee	is	not	a	committee	of	the	Board	responsible	for	the
Company’s	executive	compensation	decisions	and	composed	entirely	of	independent	directors,	a	majority	of	the
independent	directors	serving	on	the	Board)	may	determine	not	to	pursue	the	forfeiture	and/or	recovery	of	Erroneously
Awarded	Compensation	from	any	person	if	the	Committee	determines	that	such	forfeiture	and/or	recovery	would	be
impracticable	due	to	any	of	the	following	circumstances:	(i)	the	direct	expense	paid	to	a	third	party	(for	example,
reasonable	legal	expenses	and	consulting	fees)	to	assist	in	enforcing	the	Policy	would	exceed	the	amount	to	be	recovered
(following	reasonable	attempts	by	the	Company	Group	to	recover	such	Erroneously	Awarded	Compensation,	the
documentation	of	such	attempts,	and	the	provision	of	such	documentation	to	the	Nasdaq)	or	(ii)	recovery	would	likely
cause	any	otherwise	tax-qualified	retirement	plan,	under	which	benefits	are	broadly	available	to	employees	of	Company
Group,	to	fail	to	meet	the	requirements	of	26	U.S.C.
401(a)(13)	or	26	U.S.C.	411(a)	and	regulations	thereunder.
3.
Means	of	Repayment
In	the	event	that	the	Committee	determines	that	any	person	shall	repay	any	Erroneously	Awarded	Compensation,	the
Committee	shall	provide	written	notice	to	such	person	by	email	or	certified	mail	to	the	physical	address	on	file	with	the
Company	Group	for	such	person,	and	the	person	shall	satisfy	such	repayment	in	a	manner	and	on	such	terms	as	required
by	the	Committee,	and	the	Company	Group	shall	be	entitled	to	set	off	the	repayment	amount	against	any	amount	owed	to
the	person	by	the	Company	Group,	to	require	the	forfeiture	of	any	award	granted	by	the	Company	Group	to	the	person,	or
to	take	any	and	all	necessary	actions	to	reasonably	promptly	recoup	the	repayment	amount	from	the	person,	in	each	case,
to	the	fullest	extent	permitted	under	applicable	law,	including	without	limitation,	Section	409A	of	the	U.S.
3Internal	Revenue	Code	and	the	regulations	and	guidance	thereunder.	If	the	Committee	does	not	specify	a	repayment
timing	in	the	written	notice	described	above,	the	applicable	person	shall	be	required	to	repay	the	Erroneously	Awarded
Compensation	to	the	Company	Group	by	wire,	cash	or	cashier’s	check	no	later	than	thirty	(30)	days	after	receipt	of	such
notice.
4.
No	Indemnification
No	person	shall	be	indemnified,	insured	or	reimbursed	by	the	Company	Group	in	respect	of	any	loss	of	compensation	by
such	person	in	accordance	with	this	Policy,	nor	shall	any	person	receive	any	advancement	of	expenses	for	disputes	related
to	any	loss	of	compensation	by	such	person	in	accordance	with	this	Policy,	and	no	person	shall	be	paid	or	reimbursed	by
the	Company	Group	for	any	premiums	paid	by	such	person	for	any	third-party	insurance	policy	covering	potential	recovery
obligations	under	this	Policy.
5.
Miscellaneous
This	Policy	generally	will	be	administered	and	interpreted	by	the	Committee,	provided	that	the	Board	may,	from	time	to
time,	exercise	discretion	to	administer	and	interpret	this	Policy,	in	which	case,	all	references	herein	to	“Committee”	shall	be
deemed	to	refer	to	the	Board.	Any	determination	by	the	Committee	with	respect	to	this	Policy	shall	be	final,	conclusive	and
binding	on	all	interested	parties.	Any	discretionary	determinations	of	the	Committee	under	this	Policy,	if	any,	need	not	be
uniform	with	respect	to	all	persons,	and	may	be	made	selectively	amongst	persons,	whether	or	not	such	persons	are
similarly	situated.
This	Policy	is	intended	to	satisfy	the	requirements	of	Section	954	of	the	Dodd-Frank	Wall	Street	Reform	and	Consumer
Protection	Act,	as	it	may	be	amended	from	time	to	time,	Rule	10D-	1	under	the	Exchange	Act,	and	any	related	rules	or
regulations	promulgated	by	the	SEC	or	the	Nasdaq,	including	any	additional	or	new	requirements	that	become	effective
after	the	Effective	Date	which	upon	effectiveness	shall	be	deemed	to	automatically	amend	this	Policy	to	the	extent
necessary	to	comply	with	such	additional	or	new	requirements.
The	provisions	in	this	Policy	are	intended	to	be	applied	to	the	fullest	extent	of	the	law.	To	the	extent	that	any	provision
of	this	Policy	is	found	to	be	unenforceable	or	invalid	under	any	applicable	law,	such	provision	will	be	applied	to	the
maximum	extent	permitted	and	shall	automatically	be	deemed	amended	in	a	manner	consistent	with	its	objectives	to	the
extent	necessary	to	conform	to	applicable	law.	The	invalidity	or	unenforceability	of	any	provision	of	this	Policy	shall	not
affect	the	validity	or	enforceability	of	any	other	provision	of	this	Policy.	Recoupment	of	Erroneously	Awarded	Compensation
under	this	Policy	is	not	dependent	upon	the	Company	Group	satisfying	any	conditions	in	this	Policy,	including	any
requirements	to	provide	applicable	documentation	to	the	Nasdaq.
The	rights	of	the	Company	Group	under	this	Policy	to	seek	forfeiture	or	reimbursement	are	in	addition	to,	and	not	in
lieu	of,	any	rights	of	recoupment,	or	remedies	or	rights	other	than	recoupment,	that	may	be	available	to	the	Company
Group	pursuant	to	the	terms	of	any	law,	government	regulation	or	stock	exchange	listing	requirement	or	any	other	policy,
code	of
4conduct,	employee	handbook,	employment	agreement,	equity	award	agreement,	or	other	plan	or	agreement	of	the
Company	Group.
6.
Amendment	and	Termination
To	the	extent	permitted	by,	and	in	a	manner	consistent	with	applicable	law,	including	SEC	and	Nasdaq	rules,	the
Committee	may	terminate,	suspend	or	amend	this	Policy	at	any	time	in	its	discretion.
7.
Successors
This	Policy	shall	be	binding	and	enforceable	against	all	persons	and	their	respective	beneficiaries,	heirs,	executors,
administrators	or	other	legal	representatives	with	respect	to	any	Covered	Compensation	granted,	vested	or	paid	to	or
administered	by	such	persons	or	entities.
8.
Agreement	to	Arbitrate;	Governing	Law;	Venue
This	Policy	and	all	rights	and	obligations	hereunder	will	be	governed	by	and	interpreted	in	accordance	with	Texas	law.	
Any	dispute	arising	from	or	relating	to	this	Policy	shall	be	
subject	to	binding	arbitration	in	accordance	with	the	then-current
Streamlined	Arbitration	Rules	of	the	Judicial	Arbitration	and	Mediation	Services	(“
JAMS
”).		The	existence,	content	and	result
of	the	arbitration	shall	be	held	in	confidence	by	the	parties,	their	representatives,	any	other	participants	and	the	arbitrator.	
The	arbitration	will	be	conducted	by	a	single	arbitrator	selected	by	agreement	of	the	parties	or,	failing	such	agreement,
appointed	in	accordance	with	the	JAMS	rules.		The	arbitration	shall	be	conducted	in	English	and	in	Austin,	Texas.		Each
party	will	bear	its	own	expenses	in	the	arbitration	and	will	share	equally	the	costs	of	the	arbitration;	
provided
,	however,
that	the	arbitrator	may,	in	its	discretion,	award	reasonable	costs	and	fees	to	the	prevailing	party.		Judgment	upon	the
award	rendered	in	the	arbitration	may	be	entered	in	any	court	of	competent	jurisdiction.		If	any	dispute	in	arbitration	under
this	Policy	is	substantially	the	same	or	involves	common	issues	of	law	or	fact,	either	party	shall	be	entitled	to	require	that
any	such	dispute	be	consolidated	with	the	relevant	arbitration	pursuant	hereto,	and	the	other	party	shall	permit,	and	co-
operate	in,	such	consolidation.		
5Tesla,	Inc.
CLAWBACK	POLICY
ACKNOWLEDGMENT,	CONSENT	AND	AGREEMENT
I	acknowledge	that	I	have	received	and	reviewed	a	copy	of	the	Tesla,	Inc.	Clawback	Policy	(as	may	be	amended	from
time	to	time,	the	“
Policy
”)	and	I	have	been	given	an	opportunity	to	ask	questions	about	the	Policy	and	review	it	with	my
counsel.	I	knowingly,	voluntarily	and	irrevocably	consent	to	and	agree	to	be	bound	by	and	subject	to	the	Policy’s	terms	and
conditions,	including	that	I	will	return	any	Erroneously	Awarded	Compensation	that	is	required	to	be	repaid	in	accordance
with	the	Policy.	I	further	acknowledge,	understand	and	agree	that	(i)	the	compensation	that	I	receive,	have	received	or	may
become	entitled	to	receive	from	the	Company	Group	is	subject	to	the	Policy,	and	the	Policy	may	affect	such	compensation
and	(ii)	I	have	no	right	to	indemnification,	insurance	payments	or	other	reimbursement	by	or	from	the	Company	Group	for
any	compensation	that	is	subject	to	recoupment	and/or	forfeiture	under	the	Policy.
Capitalized	terms	used	but	not	defined	herein	have	the	meanings	set	forth	in	the	Policy.
Signed:
Print	Name:
Date: